/gap-review/
  Papers (showing 1-29 of 29):
    [Fu23] Reinforcement Learning Based Intelligent Routing for Software Defined LEO Satellite Networks (2023)
    GLOBECOM 2023 - 2023 IEEE Global Communications Conference, pp. 2323-2328
    Date: 2023-12-04
    By Liying Fu, Wenting Wei, Xueyu Lu, Celimuge Wu, Xiangwang Hou, Lei Lin, Chen Chen - 9 citations - 3.3 cit./yr
    PDF X
    
    The low earth orbit (LEO) satellite constellation is regarded as an effective complement to the terrestrial communication system due to its seamless coverage and ultra-low latency. Unfortunately, the highly dynamic traffic volume, as well as the inherent nature of dynamic topology changes caused by frequent link handover and uncertain hardware failures, pose severe challenges in the design of reliable routing. However, most existing reliable routing approaches with distributed schemes only focus on information exchange between adjacent nodes, which makes them fail to perceive real-time global network changes and make optimal decisions. In this paper, we propose a software defined networking (SDN) based intelligent satellite routing (SISR) method to increase the adaptivity and reliability during the packet transmission process. With the facilitation of SDN, we manage the network in a hierarchical and centralized paradigm, and further implement a more refined form of reinforcement learning (RL) to enhance the fault-tolerant ability of satellite network routing. Experimental results show that our solution can reduce latency and packet loss ratio by more than 42% and 29% compared to baselines.
    [Zha21] ASER: Scalable Distributed Routing Protocol for LEO Satellite Networks (2021)
    2021 IEEE 46th Conference on Local Computer Networks (LCN), pp. 65-72
    Date: 2021-10-04
    By Xiang Zhang, Yuan Yang, Mingwei Xu, Jing Luo - 55 citations - 11 cit./yr
    PDF X
    
    Low earth orbit (LEO) satellite networks are promising at constructing the satellite Internet. Dynamics of a large-scale LEO network topology induces critical problems on routing efficiency and scalability. Existing approaches either suffer from such routing problems, or have limited resilience against unpredictable link/node failures. We propose Area-based SatellitE Routing (ASER), a fully distributed routing protocol for LEO networks with high efficiency and scalability. ASER uses a hierarchical routing mechanism, which groups satellites into areas, in such a way that the inter-area routing never changes due to handovers of inter-satellite links. Routing can be quickly reconstructed with little overhead when either regular or unpredictable topology changes occur. We develop ASER based on OSPF, and propose an efficient algorithm to construct the forwarding table, enabling standard packet forwarding. Simulations validate that ASER can reduce the convergence time by more than 50%, and reduce computation and control overhead by orders of magnitude.
    [Din23] Fast-Convergence Reinforcement Learning for Routing in LEO Satellite Networks (2023)
    Sensors (Basel, Switzerland)
    Date: 2023-05-29
    By Zhaolong Ding, Huijie Liu, Feng Tian, Zijian Yang, Nan Wang - 24 citations - 7.3 cit./yr
    PDF ✓
    
    Fast convergence routing is a critical issue for Low Earth Orbit (LEO) constellation networks because these networks have dynamic topology changes, and transmission requirements can vary over time. However, most of the previous research has focused on the Open Shortest Path First (OSPF) routing algorithm, which is not well-suited to handle the frequent changes in the link state of the LEO satellite network. In this regard, we propose a Fast-Convergence Reinforcement Learning Satellite Routing Algorithm (FRL–SR) for LEO satellite networks, where the satellite can quickly obtain the network link status and adjust its routing strategy accordingly. In FRL–SR, each satellite node is considered an agent, and the agent selects the appropriate port for packet forwarding based on its routing policy. Whenever the satellite network state changes, the agent sends “hello” packets to the neighboring nodes to update their routing policy. Compared to traditional reinforcement learning algorithms, FRL–SR can perceive network information faster and converge faster. Additionally, FRL–SR can mask the dynamics of the satellite network topology and adaptively adjust the forwarding strategy based on the link state. The experimental results demonstrate that the proposed FRL–SR algorithm outperforms the Dijkstra algorithm in the performance of average delay, packet arriving ratio, and network load balance.
    [Yan25] Secure and Scalable Rerouting in LEO Satellite Networks (2025)
    ArXiv
    Date: 2025-09-12
    By Lyubomir Yanev, Pietro Ronchetti, Joshua Smailes, Martin Strohmeier - 3 citations - 3.0 cit./yr
    PDF ✓
    
    Resilient routing in large-scale Low Earth Orbit (LEO) satellite networks remains a key challenge due to frequent and unpredictable link and node failures, potentially in response to cybersecurity breaches. While prior work has explored rerouting strategies with various levels of network awareness, their relative tradeoffs under dynamic failure conditions remain underexplored. In this work, we extend the Deep Space Network Simulator (DSNS) to systematically compare three rerouting paradigms, each differing in the scope of failure knowledge available to each node. We compare local neighbor-based, segment-based and global-knowledge-based rerouting as well as a naive source routing solution that is unaware of failures. Our main goal is to evaluate how the breadth of failure awareness impacts routing performance and resilience under failures, both random and targeted. We measure delivery ratio, latency, rerouting overhead, and loop occurrence. Our findings show the potential of segment-based rerouting to achieve a favorable tradeoff between local responsiveness and global coordination, offering resilience benefits with minimal overhead--insights that can inform future fault-tolerant satellite network design.
    [Kim26b] Toward Wide-Area LEO Backbones: Distributed End-to-End Routing for Mega-Constellations (2026)
    IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, pp. 10152-10169
    By Soohyeong Kim, Donghyun Kim, Seogwon Kim, Jiseung Youn, Dabeen Yun, Sunghyun Cho
    PDF X
    
    Low Earth orbit (LEO) megaconstellations are emerging as a wide-area backbone that relays traffic between ground gateways. Routing in satellite–ground integrated networks is challenging because time-varying topology, uneven traffic, and intermittent link and node failures can change feasible routes during packet traversal, inducing routing–topology mismatch. Unpredictable queueing and long propagation delays widen the decision-to-transmission gap, so forwarding actions that appear feasible at decision time can become unavailable at transmission time. To mitigate this mismatch at its source, we propose a distributed Lyapunov drift-plus-penalty (DPP)-based end-to-end (E2E) routing scheme, DPP-E2E. The proposed method reformulates the robust E2E delivery objective into an online routing problem, filters candidate next hops according to predicted transmission–start-time feasibility, and then selects forwarding actions by balancing queue relief and destination progress through a distributed DPP-based rule. Combined with gateway injection and destination delivery procedures, DPP-E2E steers traffic away from emerging bottlenecks while keeping packets on routes that are more likely to remain feasible at transmission time. Simulation results show that DPP-E2E reduces the packet drop rate by up to 16.4 percentage points and improves throughput by up to 20.4% over benchmark methods, while maintaining robust delivery ratio and throughput under node-failure stress, highlighting DPP-E2E as a key enabler for wide-area LEO backbone routing.
    [Kim26] Learning-Based Resilient Dynamic Routing for Fault-Tolerant Robust LEO Satellite Networks (2026)
    IEEE Internet of Things Journal, pp. 37402-37414
    Date: 2026-08-15
    By Gyusun Kim, Chaemoon Im, Yeong-Hak Kim, Jaekyoung Ha, Joongheon Kim
    PDF X
    
    Providing seamless global internet connectivity remains a significant challenge due to geographical barriers, economic constraints, and vulnerabilities to catastrophic events, including natural disasters and warfare. Nonterrestrial networks (NTN), particularly satellite communication systems, are crucial for overcoming these limitations, but traditional geostationary Earth orbit (GEO) satellites experience inherent latency issues due to their high-altitude positioning. Low Earth orbit (LEO) satellites have emerged as superior alternatives, significantly reducing communication delays and enhancing network performance. Despite their advantages, LEO satellite networks face significant challenges arising from rapidly changing network topologies driven by high orbital speeds, resulting in frequent shifts in intersatellite link (ISL) availability. Conventional routing algorithms struggle to adapt effectively to these dynamic conditions, resulting in suboptimal routing decisions and increased latency due to congestion-related issues. To address these complexities, this article proposes an adaptive reinforcement learning (RL)-based NTN routing (ARL-NTNR) algorithm designed explicitly for dynamic LEO environments. The proposed ARL-NTNR algorithm autonomously learns and adapts optimal routing policies in real-time by continually interacting with the evolving satellite network. It effectively balances shortest-path routing with real-time queue backlog congestion management, significantly reducing packet delay and minimizing packet loss.
    [Tan24] Congestion Control and Routing Optimization for LEO Satellite Networks Based on Deep Reinforcement Learning (2024)
    2024 IEEE 7th International Conference on Automation, Electronics and Electrical Engineering (AUTEEE), pp. 746-749
    Date: 2024-12-27
    By K. Tang, Xuebin Sun - 3 citations - 1.8 cit./yr
    PDF X
    
    This paper presents a routing optimization method for LEO networks using DRL. The experimental results demonstrate that the enhanced DQN-based algorithm is effective in optimizing load balancing and alleviating routing congestion. These findings provide strong support for the performance optimization and routing decisions of LEO networks. It can be observed that the average link utilization trained by the MADQN-MQ algorithm is lower, indicating better load conditions. Compared to the Dijkstra and MADQN algorithms, it has a certain advantage in addressing the load balancing issue in the network.
    [Loz24] Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning for Distributed Satellite Routing (2024)
    ArXiv
    Date: 2024-02-27
    By Federico Lozano-Cuadra, B. Soret - 14 citations - 5.5 cit./yr
    PDF ✓
    
    This paper introduces a Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning (MA-DRL) approach for routing in Low Earth Orbit Satellite Constellations (LSatCs). Each satellite is an independent decision-making agent with a partial knowledge of the environment, and supported by feedback received from the nearby agents. Building on our previous work that introduced a Q-routing solution, the contribution of this paper is to extend it to a deep learning framework able to quickly adapt to the network and traffic changes, and based on two phases: (1) An offline exploration learning phase that relies on a global Deep Neural Network (DNN) to learn the optimal paths at each possible position and congestion level; (2) An online exploitation phase with local, on-board, pre-trained DNNs. Results show that MA-DRL efficiently learns optimal routes offline that are then loaded for an efficient distributed routing online.
    [Gre26] Dynamic Predictive Routing for Satellite Megaconstellations (2026)
    International Journal of Satellite Communications and Networking, pp. 338 - 354
    Date: 2026-01-28
    By M. Greenwood, Rob Hunter, Afonso Nunes
    PDF X
    
    Emerging low‐Earth orbit (LEO) satellite mega‐constellations introduce new challenges in traffic engineering due to their scale and highly dynamic topologies. This paper presents dynamic predictive routing (DPR), a machine learning approach that leverages graph neural networks (GNNs) and gradient‐free optimization to enhance routing performance in constellations with intersatellite links (ISLs). Unlike traditional heuristics such as Dijkstra or Bellman–Ford, which react to current topology states, DPR anticipates short‐term network evolution and proactively redistributes traffic to reduce congestion. Through simulation and emulation, we show that DPR outperforms baseline routing, achieving up to ~9% congestion reduction in highly loaded networks, with scalability to larger constellations. A GPU‐optimized path algorithm further accelerates computation, enabling feasibility in resource‐constrained environments. The vision at the heart of all mega‐constellations is a very wide area network (VWAN) with latency competitive to terrestrial fiber. While routing challenges exist in any mesh network, they are particularly critical in LEO systems, where orbital dynamics, scarce spectrum, and limited gateways intensify performance pressure. As capacity becomes a premium resource, dynamic optimization is essential to extract maximum value from the orbital real estate. An intelligent routing fabric can unlock greater throughput without proportional hardware expansion, support differentiated services, and integrate operational constraints directly into planning and decision‐making. In this paper, we describe the training methodology, including live interaction with simulated and emulated networks, and present results showing consistent congestion reduction, modest latency trade‐offs, and scalability. Importantly, the alignment of performance gains across simulation and emulation provides a strong basis for operational deployment. Further optimization remains feasible when tailoring DPR to specific network constraints.
    [Li26] Load-Balanced and Congestion-Aware Routing for LEO Laser Satellite Networks Based on Deep Reinforcement Learning (2026)
    2026 24th International Conference on Optical Communications and Networks (ICOCN), pp. 1-3
    Date: 2026-07-01
    By Haoxin Li, Junling Yuan, Xuhong Li, Qikun Zhang
    PDF X
    
    To address load imbalance in low earth orbit (LEO) laser satellite networks (LSN), this paper proposes a deep reinforcement learning (DRL) based routing algorithm, which combines proximal policy optimization (PPO) and K-shortest path (KSP) strategies to transform the large-scale routing problem into a decision-making process over a small set of paths. Simulation results demonstrate that, compared with traditional Dijkstra and random routing algorithms, the proposed algorithm fully exploits network resources, effectively prevents network bottlenecks, and significantly enhances the network’s service-carrying capacity.
    [Fer26] Traffic-Aware Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning-Based Distributed Routing for Low Earth Orbit Satellite Network (2026)
    IEEE Open Journal of Vehicular Technology, pp. 1368-1383
    By Estel Ferrer, Josep Escrig, Eduard Alarcón, Hyuk Park, J. A. Ruiz-de-Azua, Megumi Kaneko
    PDF ✓
    
    The increasing demands of modern space-based communication networks, particularly for 6G and beyond, require innovative solutions to improve the efficiency of Low Earth Orbit (LEO) satellite networks. Traditional, non-reconfigurable routing protocols face challenges in meeting the requirements for future demanding data transmission, failing to adapt to dynamic and large-scale networks. This research aims to address these limitations by developing a Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL)-based distributed routing protocol specifically designed for LEO satellite networks. Each satellite acts as an autonomous agent, learning to optimize next-hop routing decisions using real-time local information from its neighboring satellites. Numerical results demonstrate that the proposed solution achieves near-optimal performance relative to centralized shortest-path routing, while exhibiting strong robustness under link failure conditions. Under specific conditions, the proposed method reduces the end-to-end delay by 72%, 66%, and 48% compared to three conventional distributed routing protocols, respectively. Compared to a state-of-the-art RL-based distributed routing approach, the proposed method achieves delay reductions of up to 27%. Overall, our MARL-based solution demonstrates timely, cost-efficient, and autonomous routing, while minimizing end-to-end delay and avoiding congested regions.
    [Zha26b] Reinforcement learning-based robust routing strategies against cascading failures in LEO satellite networks. (2026)
    Chaos
    Date: 2026-07-01
    By Di Zhang, Yongshuai Wang, Yuying Zhu, Chengyi Xia
    PDF X
    
    Low Earth orbit (LEO) satellite networks are increasingly critical for global communications but remain vulnerable to cascading failures triggered by uneven traffic distribution and limited onboard capacity. Traditional static routing strategies are difficult to adapt to the highly dynamic topology and spatiotemporal load fluctuations inherent in LEO constellations. To address this challenge, this paper proposes a robust routing strategy based on reinforcement learning. First, we establish a realistic time-varying spatiotemporal load model that incorporates tidal traffic effects and spatial phase differences, alongside a virtual node topology mapping mechanism. Second, the routing decision process is formulated as a Markov decision process. We design a distributed Q-learning algorithm, where satellite nodes autonomously perceive local congestion states and adaptively reconfigure link weights using residual capacity and load-reciprocal priority strategies. Extensive numerical simulations demonstrate that the proposed method significantly outperforms those static baseline approaches. Specifically, it maintains the higher connectivity even under severe node failures, achieving a substantial robustness gain at the critical breakdown threshold. Furthermore, the algorithm exhibits the rapid convergence and superior cost-effectiveness, achieving high reliability at a lower normalized construction cost. Current results are conducive to understanding the robustness of LEO satellite networks, which will help to devise effective routing strategies.
    [K23] Enhancing Network Performance in LEO Satellite Networks through DRL-Based Routing Optimization (2023)
    2023 Global Conference on Information Technologies and Communications (GCITC), pp. 1-6
    Date: 2023-12-01
    By H. B. K, Dileep Kumar Sharma, Chakala Bhanu Prakash, Nagashree N, Thirumagal E - 1 citations - 0.4 cit./yr
    PDF X
    
    Routing in Low Earth Orbit (LEO) satellite networks is complex due to the constantly changing network topology, unpredictable channel conditions, and the need for high QoS. This paper puts forth an innovative routing algorithm that leverages deep reinforcement learning to tackle the challenge. The algorithm considers the available network resources, traffic demand, and QoS requirements to make dynamic and efficient routing decisions. We represent the network topology as a graph and use a deep Q-learning network (DQN) to learn the optimal routing policy. The DQN is trained offline using a dataset of simulated network scenarios and then deployed online to make routing decisions based on real-time network conditions. The algorithm employs a reward function that considers network performance metrics such as delay, packet loss, and throughput to guide the learning process. To assess the effectiveness of the suggested algorithm, we carried out simulations utilizing the ns-3 network simulator. The outcomes reveal that the proposed algorithm surpasses present routing algorithms concerning network performance metrics and QoS requirements. Additionally, the algorithm exhibits robustness to network conditions and traffic demand changes.
    [Zha26] Dynamic routing optimization and management in low Earth orbit satellite networks: a machine learning approach (2026)
    International Conference on Computing Innovation and Applied Physics, pp. 141880D - 141880D-8
    Date: 2026-05-06
    By Tinglan Zhang
    PDF X
    
    This paper addresses the challenges of high-frequency topological oscillations and complex multidimensional traffic scheduling in large-scale low-Earth orbit satellite communication systems caused by high-speed orbital motion. A dynamic routing optimization framework based on a fusion of spatiotemporal graph attention mechanism and multi-agent deep reinforcement learning is proposed. A refined non-stationary Markov decision model is constructed, and a spatiotemporal graph sensing network is designed to accurately capture the evolution of inter-satellite connectivity and local congestion trends. By introducing a lightweight, fully distributed multi-agent policy gradient execution engine, the vast joint action space is decoupled to independent onboard edge computing units, achieving efficient global computing power collaboration. Heterogeneous digital twin simulations demonstrate that under extremely high traffic load conditions, the proposed model significantly reduces the average end-to-end latency of the entire network by 66.3% compared to the baseline algorithm, directly increasing the aggregate throughput to 12.40 Gbps, and suppressing the network routing jitter rate to within 1.1%, establishing a new performance benchmark and engineering paradigm for intelligent adaptive space networks.
    [He25] SRv6-Enabled Routing Optimization in LEO Satellite Networks: A Reinforcement Learning Approach (2025)
    2025 IEEE 25th International Conference on Communication Technology (ICCT), pp. 710-718
    Date: 2025-10-16
    By Ci He, Haisong Sun, Zhaoxing Bian, Yasheng Zhang, Mingwu Yao - 1 citations - 1.1 cit./yr
    PDF X
    
    To address dynamic topology challenges of the Low Earth Orbit (LEO) satellite networks for the routing problem, this paper proposes a reinforcement learning (RL)-based routing method. Leveraging Segment Routing over IPv6 (SRv6), we design a two-layer architecture decoupling physical dynamics from routing decisions. A Deep Q-Network (DQN) model selects paths at source satellites considering predicted Maximum Link Utilization (MLU) across future time slots. Numerical results on an Iridium-like constellation (66 satellites) show that the proposed RL-based algorithm performs much better than the traditional heuristic method. The proposed method converges within 600 episodes, demonstrating robust optimization of stability, latency, and resource utilization in dynamic LEO environments.
    [Li25] Reinforcement Learning Based Minimum Hop Routing Strategy for LEO Satellite Networks (2025)
    2025 7th International Conference on Next Generation Data-driven Networks (NGDN), pp. 21-26
    Date: 2025-06-06
    By Shanling Li, Yunhe Sun, Qingbin Lian, Chenxi Zhao, Yanyan Han, Xintong Song
    PDF X
    
    As satellite networks have grown, it has become more challenging to employ conventional routing algorithms on low-orbit satellite networks because of their huge size and rapid topology changes. Furthermore, the communication efficiency of satellite networks is greatly impacted by the number of routing hops in the end-to-end transmission channel; an excessive number of hops will result in a decline in the network throughput rate and an excessive use of link resources. Consequently, this study suggests a minimum-hop routing strategy for LEO satellite networks based on reinforcement learning. It makes use of the dual-network structure of deep Q-networks (DQN) and a learning strategy, each satellite connects to its four closest neighboring satellites. Then, approaches like epsilon decay, delayed updating of the target network, and empirical playback are employed to help the intelligences in better learning the best policy. Using the Iridium constellation system as a reference, we construct a 6x6 low-orbit constellation model for simulation in order to assess the effectiveness of this approach. The results show that the strategy has good convergence and can effectively reduce the number of satellite routing hops compared to the ant colony routing optimization algorithm. This suggests that the minimum hop count routing strategy based on reinforcement learning has significant advantages in routing optimization for low-orbit satellite networks. The study's findings offer an effective, novel approach to LEO satellite network routing, thereby enhancing the quality of low-orbit satellite networks' communication services and advancing satellite network technology.
    [Che26] A Double Deep Q-Network Reinforcement Learning Method for Load-Balancing Inter-Satellite Routing in LEO Satellite Constellations (2026)
    2026 6th International Conference on Intelligent Communications and Computing (ICICC), pp. 237-241
    Date: 2026-07-01
    By Yiwei Chen, Haisu Zhang, Qingsong Li, Liangqin Yu, Xin Zhou, Fengwu Li
    PDF X
    
    Inter-satellite routing is essential for LEO satellite network reliability and traffic balancing. Conventional shortestpath routing causes local overload due to neglected link congestion, while existing RL routing approaches suffer from slow convergence, Q-value overestimation and non-standard interface designs. This paper presents a Double DQN-based load-balancing inter-satellite routing method. Taking node information and global topology-load states as inputs, it outputs forwarding directions mapped to satellite IDs. To handle large dynamic state space, multi-objective reward design and Q-value overestimation, we employ a dual-network framework, a distance-load joint reward, a dynamic $\varepsilon$-greedy strategy, and standardized satellite numbering and mapping rules. Experiments on a 66 -satellite EXata simulation platform demonstrate that the method obtains favorable performance: 8 average hops, 270 ms maximum convergence time, 4.0% normalized overhead, 0.96 s end-to-end delay and 10% ground station traffic difference. The packet loss rate is only 0.3% under 20% satellite failure, fully meeting design requirements.
    [Kri26] Reinforcement Learning for Opportunistic Routing in Software-Defined LEO—Terrestrial Systems (2026)
    IEEE Wireless Communications Letters, pp. 1817-1821
    Date: 2026-01-20
    By S. Krishnan, Zhouyou Gu, Jihong Park, Sungmin Oh, Jinho Choi - 1 citations - 1.6 cit./yr
    PDF ✓
    
    The proliferation of large-scale low Earth orbit (LEO) satellite constellations is driving the need for intelligent routing strategies that can effectively deliver data to terrestrial networks under rapidly time-varying topologies and intermittent gateway visibility. Leveraging the global control capabilities of a geostationary (GEO)-resident software-defined networking (SDN) controller, we introduce opportunistic routing, which aims to minimize delivery delay by forwarding packets to any currently available ground gateways rather than fixed destinations. This makes it a promising approach for achieving low-latency and robust data delivery in highly dynamic LEO networks. Specifically, we formulate a constrained stochastic optimization problem and employ a residual reinforcement learning framework to optimize opportunistic routing for reducing transmission delay. Simulation results over multiple days of orbital data demonstrate that our method achieves significant improvements in queue length reduction compared to classical backpressure and other well-known queueing algorithms.
    [Heg25] Routing in Low Earth Orbit Satellite Networks: Constrained DQN-Based Approach (2025)
    2025 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), pp. 1-6
    Date: 2025-03-24
    By Anupama Hegde, Manuel M. H. Roth, Hermann Bischl - 2 citations - 1.4 cit./yr
    PDF X
    
    The complexity of routing in low earth orbit satellite networks is increasing due to higher traffic loads, complex network architectures and their integration with the terrestrial networks. The time varying satellite network topology, inter-satellite link failures and the necessity to satisfy diverse quality of service requirements demands the need to investigate routing algorithms that can fulfill multiple objectives. Value based reinforcement learning methods such as Q-learning facilitate a mechanism for interaction, learning and decision making within centralized and distributed environments. In this work, we design a constrained deep Q-network based routing algorithm that calculates optimal routing paths by ensuring safe exploration. We evaluate the performance of the proposed routing algorithm for different mesh cluster sizes and identify conditions where the constraints cannot be satisfied, necessitating a switch to rule-based source routing algorithms. Furthermore, we discuss resiliency aspects such as learning in the event of dynamic link failures, computational complexity, and scalability for large satellite constellation networks.
    [Yin25] A Hybrid Routing Strategy for Congestion Mitigation in LEO Mega-Constellation Networks With Constrained Gateway Placement (2025)
    IEEE Internet of Things Journal, pp. 52505-52520
    Date: 2025-12-15
    By Zhenglong Yin, Lei Yang, Quan Chen, Jun Cai, Huaguo Yang, Yong Zhao - 2 citations - 2.7 cit./yr
    PDF X
    
    As a crucial component of future space–terrestrial integrated networks, low Earth orbit (LEO) mega-constellation networks (MCNs) are facing increasingly prominent network congestion issues due to surging user demands, particularly around gateways with geographical constraints. To address this network congestion problem, this study proposes a user-to-gateway routing approach that implements a hybrid routing strategy for congestion mitigation (HRS-CM) under restricted gateway deployment conditions. The HRS-CM consists of three phases: an access satellite (AS) selection phase based on hop count evaluation models, a semi-distributed multihop congestion avoidance routing phase based on link costs, and a gateway-centered load-balancing routing phase. All three phases are modular, allowing for flexible combinations of partial phases. Compared to traditional methods, the proposed approach achieves significant reductions in communication delay and average hop count while maintaining high performance in terms of data delivery ratio and throughput. The simulation results demonstrate the superior performance of the proposed approach in scenarios with geographically constrained gateway deployment conditions.
    [Cao19] Congestion Control Based on OSPF in LEO Satellite Constellation (2019)
    2019 IEEE 19th International Conference on Communication Technology (ICCT), pp. 1111-1115
    Date: 2019-10-01
    By Siyuan Cao, T. Zhang - 3 citations - 0.4 cit./yr
    PDF X
    
    Integrating low earth orbit (LEO) satellite network and terrestrial network is the trend of future communication network. Considering maturity of the technology and compatibility with terrestrial network, applying the widely used Open Short Path First (OSPF) in terrestrial network to satellite network is a research hotspot. However, the traditional OSPF cannot solve the congestion problem caused by uneven distribution of global users and ground stations. In this paper, a congestion control method based on OSPF is proposed for LEO satellite network. The transmission distance and interface cache state are both considered as factors of the shortest path. Congestion control is achieved by designing new cost and adjusting interface cache state update process. Simulations show that the advanced protocol can effectively reduce packet loss caused by congestion.
    [Sun26] Hybrid SRv6 and Reinforcement Learning Routing for Dynamic LEO Satellite Networks (2026)
    Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Computer, Artificial Intelligence and Control Engineering
    Date: 2026-01-23
    By Chengxi Sun, Chengbin Huang, Cong Li, Zhiyi Wang, Chen Chen
    PDF X
    
    Routing in low Earth orbit (LEO) satellite networks is difficult because of dynamic topology, intermittent links, and bursty traffic, which often cause slow convergence and unstable forwarding. This paper proposes RL-SRv6, a hybrid routing framework that combines distributed deep reinforcement learning with SRv6 to improve routing adaptability and stability. In normal conditions, each satellite runs a lightweight DQN agent to choose the next hop using local queue status and link quality. When congestion or link failure occurs, RL-SRv6 quickly switches to a predefined SRv6 segment list to enforce loop-free paths and reroute traffic without waiting for learning or control-plane convergence. A stability control mechanism with hysteresis and inhibition is also designed to reduce frequent path changes. Simulation results show that RL-SRv6 performs well in large-scale constellations, reducing convergence delay and routing oscillations, and providing faster recovery and more stable routing under failures and traffic surges.
    [Gri22] Rethinking LEO Constellations Routing with the Unsplittable Multi-Commodity Flows Problem (2022)
    2022 11th Advanced Satellite Multimedia Systems Conference and the 17th Signal Processing for Space Communications Workshop (ASMS/SPSC), pp. 1-8
    Date: 2022-09-06
    By Paul Grislain, Nicolas Pelissier, François Lamothe, Oana Hotescu, J. Lacan, E. Lochin, J. Radzik - 11 citations - 2.7 cit./yr
    PDF ✓
    
    This study investigates the performance of an innovative routing protocol inspired by the Unsplittable Multi-Commodity Flow (UMCF) problem. LEO routing schemes are often based on Shortest Path (SP) algorithms, the Floyd-Warshall algorithm is usually chosen to compute these network paths within the constellation and their end-to-end latency. Instead of considering latency as a criterion, we seek to optimize the overall amount of IP traffic crossing the constellation. This criterion can be optimized by considering the Unsplittable Multi Commodity Flow problem associated with the system. To solve this problem, we use a heuristic algorithm based on randomized rounding that was shown to return solutions of good quality of the Unsplittable Multi Commodity Flow problem in the optimization literature. Using network simulation over Telesat constellation, we show this proposal significantly reduces the overall congestion level compared to the standard SP routing schemes.
    [Wan23] An Intelligent Area-segmentation Enabled Hybrid Routing Method in Mega-constellations (2023)
    2023 IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps), pp. 443-448
    Date: 2023-12-04
    By Kaiwei Wang, Jiaxin Zhang, Shuang Zheng, Peng Wang, Xing Zhang, Barry G. Evans - 7 citations - 2.5 cit./yr
    PDF X
    
    With the rapid development of very high-speed inter-satellite links, effective and intelligent routing strategy has become a hot topic in the next generation (6G) mega-constellations. However, constrained by the high dynamic time-varying topology and limited on-board processing capability, the existed routing schemes incur excessive control overhead, huge latency, and packet loss rate caused by the congestion. In this paper, an intelligent area-segmentation enabled hybrid routing method is proposed, combining centralized and distributed methods and adapting to the congested area dynamically. Specifically, with software-defined features, only the Low Earth Orbit (LEO) satellites with congested links report the state information to the controllers, consisting of both Geostationary Earth Orbit (GEO) satellites and Ground Computing Center (GCC), to periodically calculate the accurate congested areas using Deep Q- Network (DQN) algorithm. Numerical simulation results indicate that, the proposed method reduces control overhead by orders of magni-tude and decreases the packet loss rate by approximately 40% in mega-constellations, toward the future resilient and scalable 6G communication networks compared with the traditional schemes.
    [Rot24] Shaping Rewards, Shaping Routes: On Multi-Agent Deep Q-Networks for Routing in Satellite Constellation Networks (2024)
    ArXiv
    Date: 2024-08-04
    By Manuel M. H. Roth, Anupama Hegde, T. Delamotte, Andreas Knopp - 4 citations - 1.9 cit./yr
    PDF ✓
    
    Effective routing in satellite mega-constellations has become crucial to facilitate the handling of increasing traffic loads, more complex network architectures, as well as the integration into 6G networks. To enhance adaptability as well as robustness to unpredictable traffic demands, and to solve dynamic routing environments efficiently, machine learning-based solutions are being considered. For network control problems, such as optimizing packet forwarding decisions according to Quality of Service requirements and maintaining network stability, deep reinforcement learning techniques have demonstrated promising results. For this reason, we investigate the viability of multi-agent deep Q-networks for routing in satellite constellation networks. We focus specifically on reward shaping and quantifying training convergence for joint optimization of latency and load balancing in static and dynamic scenarios. To address identified drawbacks, we propose a novel hybrid solution based on centralized learning and decentralized control.
    [Bar26] Unlocking Resilience and Load Balancing: Toward Hop-By-Hop Routing for LEO Mega-Constellations (2026)
    2026 IEEE 23rd Consumer Communications & Networking Conference (CCNC), pp. 1-2
    Date: 2026-01-09
    By Louis Barbier, Oana Hotescu, J. Lacan, Emmanuel Lochin
    PDF X
    
    We propose a fully decentralized, adaptive routing system that exploits the dynamic topology of Walker Delta Low Earth Orbit (LEO) constellations to achieve efficient traffic distribution and improved reliability without requiring global link-state information. The system addresses scalability challenges in mega-constellations, where congestion, limited ground infrastructure, and uneven user distribution degrade service quality in high-demand regions. Although inter-satellite links provide diverse routing paths, the lack of multibeam support in some terminals complicates routing and can increase path length during cross-plane communication. Our evaluation of a Hop-by-Hop based strategy in Walker Delta constellations shows that it achieves performance comparable to optimal congestion-minimization algorithms and outperforms source-routing methods, while maintaining near-minimal hop counts for low-latency communication.
    [Cho26] Spatial-Temporal Learning-Based Distributed Routing for Dynamic LEO Satellite Networks (2026)
    ArXiv
    Date: 2026-05-04
    By Po-Heng Chou, Chia‐Lun Wang, Shoudao Chen, Hsiang-Ming Wang
    PDF ✓
    
    In this paper, we propose a spatial-temporal learning-based distributed routing framework for dynamic Low Earth Orbit (LEO) satellite networks, where graph attention networks (GAT) and long short-term memory (LSTM) are integrated within a deep Q-network (DQN)-based architecture to enable distributed and adaptive routing decisions based on local observations. The routing problem is formulated as a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) to address partial observability under dynamic topology and time-varying traffic. Simulation results show that the proposed method significantly outperforms conventional and learning-based routing schemes in terms of throughput, packet loss, queue length, and end-to-end delay, while achieving proactive congestion avoidance with up to 23.26% queue reduction. In addition, the proposed approach maintains low computational overhead with negligible carbon emissions, demonstrating its efficiency from a Green AI perspective.
    [Wei26] STG-SR: Spatio-Temporal Graph based Load Balancing Routing for Satellite Networks (2026)
    2026 6th International Conference on Intelligent Communications and Computing (ICICC), pp. 181-185
    Date: 2026-07-01
    By Wenting Wei, Liying Fu, Xiaoming Yuan, Wenchuan Zhang
    PDF X
    
    Low Earth Orbit (LEO) satellite networks face challenging routing conditions due to dynamic topology evolution and uneven spatio-temporal traffic distributions. To address the difficulty of jointly supporting network-wide path adaptation and localized congestion mitigation, this paper proposes STG-SR, a cohesive load-balancing routing framework for softwaredefined satellite networks. Specifically, STG-SR combines a global spatio-temporal graph with deep reinforcement learning for basic path provisioning, while employing a local spatio-temporal graph for forwarding-table reconstruction and congestion-aware multipath traffic splitting. Simulation results under low-density and high-density spatio-temporal traffic patterns show that STG-SR achieves lower delay, reduces the congestion node ratio, and improves traffic distribution compared with Dijkstra, DBPR, and CGR, demonstrating the effectiveness of coordinated global-local routing in dynamic LEO satellite networks.
    [Sor23] Q-learning for distributed routing in LEO satellite constellations (2023)
    2024 IEEE International Conference on Machine Learning for Communication and Networking (ICMLCN), pp. 208-213
    Date: 2023-06-02
    By B. Soret, Israel Leyva-Mayorga, Federico Lozano-Cuadra, Mathias D. Thorsager - 24 citations - 7.3 cit./yr
    PDF ✓
    
    End-to-end routing in Low Earth Orbit (LEO) Satellite Constellations (LSatCs) is a complex and dynamic problem. The topology, of finite size, is dynamic and predictable, the traffic from/to Earth and transiting the space segment is highly imbalanced, and the delay is dominated by the propagation time in non-congested routes and by the queueing time at Inter-Satellite Links (ISLs) in congested routes. Traditional routing algorithms depend on excessive communication with ground or other satellites, and oversimplify the characterization of the path links towards the destination. We model the problem as a multi-agent Partially Observable Markov Decision Problem (POMDP) where the nodes (i.e., the satellites) interact only with nearby nodes. We propose a distributed Q-learning solution that leverages the knowledge of the neighbours and the correlation of the routing decisions of each node. We compare our results to two centralized algorithms based on the shortest path: one aiming at using the highest data rate links and a second genie algorithm that assumes that the instantaneous queueing delays are available at all satellites. The results of our proposal are positive on every front: (1) it experiences delays that are comparable to the benchmarks in steady-state conditions; (2) it increases the supported traffic load without congestion; and (3) it can be easily implemented in a LSatC as it does not depend on the ground segment and minimizes the signaling overhead among satellites.

PDF symbols - ✓ PDF available; X No PDF available; … PDF download attempt in progress

When presenting papers in your reply, fetch their DOIs with get_paper_info (show_doi=true) and present cite keys as [[cite_key]](https://doi.org/<DOI>). Use the Link returned by get_paper_info for papers without a DOI.

When mentioning this folder to the user, include its web-app link: https://app.undermind.ai/projects/eef99118-f623-4a47-a34a-05c6617b7ecb?path=<its URL-encoded path> (folder paths end with '/')