A Multi-Agent, Policy-Gradient approach to Network Routin g
Nigel T ao Nigel.Tao@cs.anu.edu.au
Department of Computer Science, The Australian National Univers ity, Canberra 0200, Australia
Jonathan Baxter jbaxter@whizbang.com
WhizBang! Labs. 4616 Henry Street Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Lex Weaver Lex.Weaver@cs.anu.edu.au
Department of Computer Science, The Australian National Univers ity, Canberra 0200, Australia
Abstract
Network routing is a distributed decision
problem which naturally admits numerical
performance measures, such as the average
time for a packet to travel from source to
destination. Olpomdp, a policy-gradient reinforcement learning algorithm, was successfully applied to simulated network routing
under a number of network models. Multiple distributed agents (routers) learned cooperative behavior without explicit interagent communication, and they avoided behavior which was individually desirable, but
detrimental to the group’s overall performance. Furthermore, shaping the reward signal by explicitly penalizing certain patterns
of sub-optimal behavior was found to dramatically improve the convergence rate.
1. Introduction
Network routing is the problem of eﬃciently using
communication paths. The standard example is Internet packet routing, but a broader view incorporates
messaging in multi-processor computers, and the design of transport networks (such as vehicle traﬃc, airline scheduling and water distribution).
Current approaches to routing model the network as a
graph with nodes representing routers and weighted
edges representing links and their associated costs.
Finding good approaches to routing is thus reduced to
analytically solving various optimization problems for
weighted graphs (Deo & Pang, 1984). Although elegant solutions to such problems have been found (Dijkstra, 1956; Bellman, 1958; Cormen et al., 1990; Tanenbaum, 1996), the algorithms can become intractable,
as the models approach realism. In one example, Orda
et al. (1993) consider the problem of graphs where the
edge weights can change probabilistically (as a Markov
process). In this case, they conclude that the minimal
expected delay routing problem is NP-hard.
Even if the problem posed by the model is tractable,
unrealistic modeling may mean that the derived solution is sub-optimal. Real world networks exhibit
a variety of features which are not captured in the
standard weighted-graph model. Such complexities
include links having limited bandwidth or capacity,
limited buﬀering at either or both ends of channels,
packet collisions, mobile hosts (i.e. changing link delays), deadlock concerns, unreliable links, non-uniform
traﬃc (e.g. Poisson distributed, or bursty), minimum
Quality-of-Service requirements, and prioritized traﬃc
(Tanenbaum, 1996).
There is also the problem of co-ordination, whether
between routers or between packets from one router.
Synchronization problems can occur where two routers
sharing two links simultaneously notice that one of
the links is not congested and both attempt to use it,
causing congestion. This problem is worsened when
the two routers notice the other link is now free and
both choose to use it, causing congestion again. This
situation repeats, with the two routers oscillating between the two links — a phenomenon known as ﬂapping (Tanenbaum, 1996).
In view of the potential diﬃculties with model-based
approaches to network routing, in this paper we pursue an alternative, model-free approach in which the
routing problem is treated as a multi-agent reinforcement learning problem. Each router is viewed as a single independent agent, and makes its routing decisions
according to a local parameterized stochastic policy.
The negative of the trip time of each packet is used as
an instantaneous reward signal delivered to all agents
(routers) upon arrival of the packet at its destination.
Each agent uses a policy-gradient reinforcement learnarXiv:2512.03211v1  [cs.LG]  2 Dec 2025
ing algorithm to adjust the parameters of its policy
in the direction of the gradient of the average reward,
leading to convergence of all router parameters to a
local maximum of the average reward, or equivalently
to a local minimum of the average packet trip time.
The policy-gradient algorithm we use is a multi-agent
variant of the Olpomdp algorithm introduced in Baxter et al. (2001), and analyzed in (Bartlett & Baxter,
2000b).
The key feature of multi-agent Olpomdp that makes it
attractive for the network routing problem is that the
only non-local information each router needs is the instantaneous reward signal distributed upon a packet’s
arrival at its destination. In particular, routers do not
need to know the network topology or any other information about the network in order to climb the gradient of the global average reward.
We describe experiments on several diﬀerent network
models in which multiple distributed routers learned
to successfully minimize average packet trip-time. The
networks were designed such that routers had to avoid
individually desirable behaviour (minimizing trip-time
for the single router’s packets alone) in order to achieve
co-operative behaviour that maximized the global objective. We also show that shaping the reward signal by explicitly penalizing certain patterns of suboptimal behavior can dramatically improve the convergence rate, alleviating one of the major diﬃculties
with the use of stochastic gradient algorithms.
1.1 Reinforcement Learning and Routing
The idea of applying reinforcement learning to network routing is not new. Boyan and Littman (1993)
introduced Q-routing, an adaptation of Q-learning to
network routing. In this application, the destination
node is given, and the value of a state (i.e. node) is the
expected time-to-arrival from that node to the destination node. Value estimates are communicated between nodes, i.e. state evaluations are updated based
on values of future states.
This approach is very similar to Distance Vector routing, and the two methods have the same roots. Distance Vector routing is also known as Bellman-Ford
routing (Bellman, 1958), and Q-learning has its roots
in dynamic programming, also due to Bellman (1957).
Although Q-routing adapted well to rising link costs
(i.e. queueing times), it has a number of weaknesses.
First, it is a deterministic algorithm, in that at a particular time, there is only one link chosen for trafﬁc from a node. If this link has limited bandwidth,
then routing all traﬃc through it may not be an optimal choice. Second, Q-routing does not maintain
exploratory behavior — when a link is continually valued highest, then other links are never tried. Network changes (e.g. new hosts, faster links) may not
be discovered, since a sub-optimal policy can be continually followed whilst the value of a better policy is
under-estimated. Third, the “Count-to-Inﬁnity” problem may occur (Tanenbaum, 1996), when node A’s
value is calculated from node B’s value, which is calculated from node A’s value. This indirect self-reference
can lead to long convergence times.
Stone (2000) later applied TPOT-RL to network routing. His algorithm is explicitly multi-agent, and efﬁciently incorporates domain-speciﬁc features such as
link utilization rates into the agents’ observation space.
However, TPOT-RL learns value functions, like Qrouting, and may suﬀer from the ﬁrst two weaknesses
outlined above. It does avoid the “Count-to-Inﬁnity”
problem, by using a TD(1) style update rather than
Q-routing’s simpler TD(0) approach.
2. Network Routing as a Multi-Agent,
Partially Observable Markov
Decision Process
Each router in a network may be viewed as an agent
that receives as input packets destined for some other
node in the network. The agent (router) must decide
on which of the possible outgoing links to send the
packet. Assuming a stochastic agent, let µ i
u(y) denote
the probability that router i chooses link u for a packet
routed to destination node y. The decision problem is
only partially observable, since each agent sees only
a subset of the packets, and not the state of the entire network. It is a Markov process, because the next
state of the network is dependent only upon the current state and the decisions of all the routers. Finally,
multiple nodes makes it a multi-agent problem. Thus,
network routing is a multi-agent, partially observable,
Markov decision process ( Pomdp).
To complete the picture we need to deﬁne a performance measure for the network. A natural performance measure at the packet level is trip time, or the
time taken for a packet to get from source node to destination node. Longer trip times are less desirable, so
at time t we set the reward signal to be the negative
sum of the trip times of all packets which arrived at
time t:
rt := −
∑
p
trip
time of ( p ) (1)
where the sum is over all packets that arrive at their
destination at time t.1 Note that provided the probability of each routing decision, µ i
u(y), is non-zero, every packet will eventually arrive at its destination with
probability 1.
To make the routers trainable, we parameterize each
with a set of real-valued parameters θi
yu, one for each
possible destination / outgoing link pair ( y, u ). To
keep the computations simple, we use a Gibbs distribution so that a packet arriving at router i, destined
for node y, is sent on link u with probability
µ i
u(y, θ ) := eθ i
yu
∑
u′ eθ i
yu′
(2)
where the sum is over all outgoing links at router i.
2.1 Multi-Agent Policy-Gradient Using
OLPOMDP
Our aim is to ﬁnd parameter settings for all the routers
that maximizes the expected long-term average reward:
η(θ) := E
[
lim
T →∞
1
T
T∑
t=1
rt
]
(3)
where θ is the concatentaion of the parameters from
all routers. Provided that the system is ergodic (i.e. it
converges to a unique steady state, given θ), the righthand-side of (3) is independent of the network starting
state, and converges with probability 1 over all possible reward sequences {rt}. Note that maximizing the
long-term average reward η(θ) is equivalent to minimizing the average packet trip-time.
We use stochastic gradient ascent to ﬁnd local optima
of η(θ). That is, at each time step t the parameters θt
of all the routers are updated by
θt+1 = θt + ∆ θt (4)
where the long-term average of the updates ∆ θt lie
in the gradient direction ∇ η(θ). Since we are adjusting the policy parameters θ to climb the gradient of
1This is unrealistic, in that information at a node (i.e.
the trip times of all arriving packets) has to be instantaneously communicated to all other nodes. Alternatively,
each node i can calculate its component of the reward signal ri
t := − ∑
p trip
time of ( p ) where now the sum is only
over packets destined for i. This component can be regularly broadcast via the network, and each router’s reward
signal is merely the sum of all components received in that
time step. This means that rewards are delayed, but this
does not aﬀect a policy’s long-term average reward, although it may aﬀect the training algorithm in that the
delay between an action and its eﬀect on the reward signal is increased. In practice, we found that modeling the
broadcast and receipt of reward components via the network does not signiﬁcantly aﬀect results (Tao, 2000).
the average reward η(θ), this approach is known as a
policy-gradient algorithm.
Policy-gradient algorithms were introduced into Machine Learning by Williams (1992) with his Reinforce algorithm (similar algorithms were described
earlier in the Monte-Carlo literature by Glynn (1986);
Reiman and Weiss (1986)). A practical diﬃculty with
Reinforce, and a number of subsequent algorithms
(Marbach & Tsitsiklis, 1998; Baird & Moore, 1999;
Meuleau et al., 1999; Meuleau et al., 2000) is that they
estimate the gradient from a speciﬁed recurrent state,
which requires perfect, rather than partial, observability (at least in that state). In addition, the variance
of the gradient estimate is related to the time to return to this recurrent state, which can be large, particularly in multiple-agent environments. For example,
with network routing, the time between identical conﬁgurations of the network can grow exponentially with
the size of the network.
Removing the need to identify a particular recurrent state, Baxter and Bartlett (2001) introduced
Gpomdp, an algorithm for generating a biased estimate of the gradient ∇ β η(θ). Gpomdp takes one free
parameter β ∈ [0, 1) which controls both the bias and
the variance of the estimates produced by the algorithm. In particular, the bias of Gpomdp is small
provided τalg := 1 / (1 − β ) is small compared to a
certain mixing time τ of a Markov process associated
with the pomdp. The relevant mixing time is essentially the time constant in the decay of the inﬂuence
of an action on the reward signal. τ is always shorter
than the recurrence time, and is often considerably so.
The variance of the estimate produced by Gpomdp after T steps is proportional to τalg/T , illustrating the
bias/variance trade-oﬀ in the selection of β : large β
gives small bias but large variance and vice-versa. See
(Bartlett & Baxter, 2000a) for a detailed exposition.
Olpomdp is an online adaptation of Gpomdp which
applies policy parameter updates as soon as they are
calculated (Baxter et al., 2001). If θi
t is the parameter vector of the i-th router at time t, the updated
parameter vector vector θi
t+1 is given by
θi
t+1 := θi
t + γt.r t.z i
t (5)
where rt is the sum of the rewards (negative trip times)
for all packets arriving at time t, γt are suitable stepsizes2, and zi
t is an eligibility trace of the same dimen2Suﬃcient conditions on γt are γt > 0, ∑ γt = ∞ ,∑ γ 2
t < ∞ , which is satisﬁed, for example, by γt = 1 /t ,
although to speed convergence in this paper we set γt to
be a suitably small constant.
sionality as θi
t, which is updated according to
zi
t+1 := β.z i
t + ∇ µ i
ut (yt, θ i)
µ i
ut (yt, θ i) (6)
Here yt is the destination node of the packet at router
i at time t, and ut is the outgoing link on which it was
routed. The gradient operator ∇ is with respect to the
parameters of the i-th router, θi.
With the Gibbs parameterization in (2),
∇ µ i
ut (yt, θ i)
µ i
ut (yt, θ i) = − [ µ i
1(yt,θ i), ..., µ i
ut (yt,θ i)− 1, ..., µ i
n(yt,θ i) ]
(7)
Since Olpomdp computes a biased estimate of the gradient, it cannot be guaranteed to converge to a local
optimum of the average reward. However, provided
the bias is suﬃciently small (i.e β is suﬃciently large),
Olpomdp will converge to a region of near-zero gradient (Bartlett & Baxter, 2000b). This can be extended
to the multi-agent case.
Apart from the globally distributed reward signal rt,
each router uses only local information in its parameter updates (the router’s parameters, the packet destination, and the link on which the packet is routed).
Thus, multi-agent Olpomdp is particularly attractive
as an algorithm for optimizing the co-operative behaviour of all routers. For similar observations in the
context of episodic tasks, see (Peshkin et al., 2000).
3. Experiments
3.1 A Simple Network
Figure 1 depicts a simple network with three nodes,
and three links. The numbers on the links are the link
delay; the time between when a packet is placed on
the link and when it arrives at the other end. Note
that the shortest path from A to C is actually via B.
In this simulation, traﬃc was generated at a rate of
one packet per time step at each of the three nodes,
with the destination node chosen at random.
A
1
1
3 B
C
Figure 1. The triangle network.
Figure 2 shows a typical run of the Olpomdp routing
algorithm (with parameters β = 0 . 99 and γ = 10 − 5)
on the simple network. The top chart shows that the
reward signal 3 improves, on average, over time to an
optimum. The bottom chart shows the probability of
the agent at A routing packets destined for C on link
AB. Initially, it learns to avoid that link, since the AC
link (at a cost of 3 for certain) is preferable to going
via B (which chooses the wrong link half the time).
However, as B learns to route packets destined for C,
the AB link (followed by the BC link) becomes a better
option. The family of agents have learned the best
collective policy, even though it requires the agent at
A to rely on the agent at B.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0 1e+06 2e+06 3e+06 4e+06 5e+06 6e+06 7e+06 8e+06 9e+06
Probability of Router A Choosing the AB Link for C
Time
-8
-7.5
-7
-6.5
-6
-5.5
-5
-4.5
-4
0 1e+06 2e+06 3e+06 4e+06 5e+06 6e+06 7e+06 8e+06 9e+06
Reward Signal
Time
Figure 2. Reward signal rt and probability µ A
AB(C) for
Olpomdp on the triangle network.3The chart actually shows a moving average, since the
reward signal is quite volatile. Rewards are generated only
when packets arrive at their destination, whilst traﬃc is
generated probabilistically, and routed probabilistical ly.
3.2 Mixed Strategies
Figure 3 shows a two-node network, with two links
from A to B. Unlike the previous example, these links
have a limited capacity, and packets placed on a saturated link are simply dropped. To capture the undesirability of losing packets, a penalty term d is subtracted
from the reward signal every time a packet is dropped.
A B
6 [capacity 100]
1 [capacity 1]
Figure 3. The contention network.
In this experiment, traﬃc was only generated at A
(and destined for B), at a rate of two packets every
time step. If the top link is chosen every time, then
the average reward signal is − 1 − d, since one packet
gets through (for a trip time of 1) and one packet is
dropped. If the bottom link is chosen every time, then
the average reward signal is − 12, since two packets get
through (for a trip time of 6 each). If a probabilistic
policy is pursued, then the long-term expected average
reward can be calculated based on the probabilities of
each possible outcome occuring: both packets placed
on the top link, both on the bottom link, or one on
each link.
If the drop penalty d is set to 21, then a simple calculation shows that the optimal probability of choosing
the top link is 1
4 . Figure 4 shows the performance of
the Olpomdp routing algorithm (with β = 0 . 99 and
γ = 10 − 7) on such a situation. The routing agent
has learned the optimal non-deterministic policy, for
a long-term average performance of -10 3
4 . This outperforms either deterministic strategy (-22 for the top
link only, and -12 for the bottom link only).
3.3 Penalizing Cycles
The routing algorithm thus far does not include any
domain knowledge. In general, no shortest path can
contain a cycle 4. This fact has been exploited by Caro
and Dorigo (1998), who drop all links of a cycle out
of their eligibility trace equivalent, and Stone (2000),
who immediately downgrades an appropriate Q-value
by some proportion of the duration of the cycle.
4This is because each extra link in a cycle taken incurs a
further cost, but traversing a cycle has no net eﬀect. However, this result breaks down if links chosen for one packet
can aﬀect another packet, e.g. with limited bandwidth.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0 1e+06 2e+06 3e+06 4e+06 5e+06 6e+06
Probability of Router A Choosing the Top Link for B
Title
-12.2
-12
-11.8
-11.6
-11.4
-11.2
-11
-10.8
-10.6
-10.4
0 1e+06 2e+06 3e+06 4e+06 5e+06 6e+06
Reward Signal
Time
Figure 4. Reward signal rt and probability µ A
top
link(B) for
Olpomdp on the 2-node contention network.
In this paper, we incorporate an explicit global penalty
term for cycles. The penalty is delivered as a negative component to the reward signal. This an example
of reward shaping, where the reinforcement signal r
consists of both an underlying performance measure
runderlying and a shaping term rshaping . The two components are simply summed:
rt := runderlying
t + rshaping
t
where the underlying performance measure is as before, given by equation 1.
Note that an optimal policy (under the original performance measure) remains optimal even when cycles are
penalized, since such a policy cannot contain cycles
Figure 5 depicts a simple network with six nodes with
each link having delay 1 and unlimited capacity. Packets maintained a history of the last 2 nodes visited, and
signalled a cycle if it arrived at a node it had visited
before. The shaping term was set to − 100 multiplied
by the number of cycles detected in that time step.
C D
B
A F
E
Figure 5. The complete six-node network. All links have
delay 1 and unlimited capacity.
Figure 6 shows the underlying performance measure
for two typical runs of the Olpomdp algorithm (with
β = 0 . 9, and γ = 10 − 6). Clearly, the introduction
of cycle penalties has dramatically improved the convergence rate. Note that this occurred even without explicit credit assignment. All agents were penalized even if only one agent made the wrong decision.
Nonetheless, this scheme was very eﬀective.
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0 1e+07 2e+07 3e+07 4e+07 5e+07 6e+07 7e+07 8e+07 9e+07
Underlying Reward Signal
Time
Cycle Penalties
No Cycle Penalties
Figure 6. Improvement in the underlying reward signal,
with and without cycle penalties, for Olpomdp on the complete six-node network.
3.4 Braess’ Network Paradox
Braess (1968) discovered a routing problem in which
adding an extra path had the paradoxical eﬀect of
worsening overall performance. This paradox has been
constructed for queueing networks (Cohen & Kelly,
1990), but we take our formulation from Tumer and
Wolpert (1999), which is simpler to analyze.
The two networks are shown in ﬁgure 7. The network
model here diﬀers from the previous experiments, in
that costs are incurred at nodes, rather than travelling
through links. The formulae (e.g. 50 + x) marking
each node denote the cost per packet of using that
node, where x is the traﬃc ﬂow through that node.
The motivation for this model comes from vehicular
traﬃc, where each additional packet (i.e. car) causes
a cost (i.e. congestion and waiting time) for each other
packet through that node (i.e. cars at that junction).
50+x
10x
B
50+x
10x
A
C
D
E
F
50+x
10x
10+x
50+x
10x
A
B
D
C E
F
G
Figure 7. Braess’ networks: the left hand network is
Braess 0, and the right hand network is Braess 1.
Consider the left hand network, which we denote
Braess 0. Suppose that there are six packets to be
routed from A to B. If all packets go down the left
hand path, nodes C and D record a ﬂow of x = 6,
and so the cost per packet is (50 + 6) + (10 × 6) = 116.
Similarly, if all packets are routed down the right hand
side, the total cost is 6 × 116. In fact, the lowest cost
routing strategy is three packets down each path, for
a cost per packet of (50 + 3) + (10 × 3) = 83.
Now consider the right hand network, denoted
Braess 1. Again, let there be six packets to be routed
from A to B. Any valid routing strategy for Braess 0
remains a valid routing strategy for Braess 1, since
Braess 1 is simply Braess 0 augmented by the node
G and the two links EG and GD. In particular, it is
possible to achieve an average cost of 83.
However, packets at E now have two paths to B: either
EFB or EGDB. A greedy strategy (such as Q-routing)
will not stay at three packets down each path ACDB
and AEFB (and none down AEGDB). This is because
the cost from E to B via F is an extra 53 at F. However, the cost from E to B via G and D is 11 at G
(with ﬂow 1), and 40 at D (with ﬂow 4), which totals to 51. Thus, the lowest cost path from E to B for
the marginal packet is actually through G. In Braess 1,
equilibrium is achieved when two packets go down each
path: ACDB, AEFB, and AEGDB. However, in this
case, the average cost per packet is 92, which is higher
than the best strategy for Braess 0.
The Olpomdp routing algorithm (with β = 0 . 99 and
γ = 10 − 5) was run on Braess 1, the augmented network. In this simulation, traﬃc was only generated at
A for B (at a rate of six packets per time step), and
links were one-way and downward (i.e. C has only one
link to choose from, and E has two). Figure 8 shows
a typical run, with the top chart depicting the probability of packets at A taking the left link, and the
bottom chart depicting the probability of packets at
E taking the downward link. Note that the ﬁrst number hovers around 50%, whilst the second converges
to 100%. This represents the optimal policy, with half
of the traﬃc (i.e. three packets) going through ACDB,
and of the remaining three packets through E, zero go
through G, with three going through AEFB.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0 2e+06 4e+06 6e+06 8e+06 1e+07 1.2e+07 1.4e+07 1.6e+07 1.8e+07 2e+07
Probability of Router E Choosing the EF Link
Time
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0 2e+06 4e+06 6e+06 8e+06 1e+07 1.2e+07 1.4e+07 1.6e+07 1.8e+07 2e+07
Probability of Router A Choosing the AC Link
Time
Figure 8. Probabilities µ A
AC(B) and µ E
EF(B) for Olpomdp in
Braess’ second network.
4. Conclusion
We have shown that Olpomdp, a policy-gradient reinforcement learning algorithm, can successfully tackle a
distributed, delayed reward, partially observable, multiple agent learning problem. Optimum solutions were
found, and this was achieved without an explicit system model (i.e. a set of system states and the state
transition function).
The algorithm was robust, performing well under
a number of network models: the link-delay-as-cost
model (with and without link capacities) of §3.1-3, and
the node-ﬂow-determines-cost model of §3.4. This is
in contrast to most routing algorithms that are tailored to a speciﬁc network model and may fail if their
assumptions are broken.
In particular, we have shown that Olpomdp, and
policy-gradient methods in general, can
• learn co-operative behavior without explicit credit
assignment, or even inter-agent communication
other than the reward signal. (See §3.1)
• learn mixed (or non-deterministic) strategies,
when they are preferable to any deterministic
strategy. (See §3.2)
• learn at a much faster rate, when the reward signal is altered to explicitly penalize certain patterns of sub-optimal behavior. (See §3.3)
• learn to avoid behavior which is individually desirable, but detrimental to the group’s performance.
(See §3.4)
These strengths are not limited to the domain of network routing. Policy-gradient reinforcement learning
is an eﬀective approach with wide applicability.
Acknowledgements
Nigel Tao received ﬁnancial support from the Australian National University and Burgmann College.
This research was supported by the Australian Research Council.
References
Baird, L., & Moore, A. (1999). Gradient Descent for
General Reinforcement Learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 11 . MIT Press.
Bartlett, P. L., & Baxter, J. (2000a). Estimation
and Approximation Bounds for Gradient-Based Reinforcement Learning. Proceedings of the Thirteenth Annual Conference on Computational Learning Theory (pp. 133–141).
Bartlett, P. L., & Baxter, J. (2000b). Stochastic Optimization of Controlled Partially Observable Markov
Decision Processes. Proceedings of the 39th IEEE
Conference on Decision and Control (CDC00) .
Baxter, J., & Bartlett, P. L. (2001). Algorithms for
inﬁnite-horizon policy-gradient estimation. Journal
of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research , 14. To appear.
Baxter, J., Bartlett, P. L., & Weaver, L. (2001). Experiments with inﬁnite-horizon, policy-gradient estimation. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research ,
14. To appear.
Bellman, R. E. (1957). Dynamic Programming .
Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Bellman, R. E. (1958). On a Routing Problem. Quarterly of Applied Mathematics , 16, 87–90.
Boyan, J. A., & Littman, M. L. (1993). Packet Routing in Dynamically Changing Networks: A Reinforcement Learning Approach. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems , 6, 671–678.
Braess, D. (1968). Uber ein Paradoxon aus der
Verkehrsplanung [A paradox of traﬃc assignment
problems]. Unternehmensforschung, 12, 258–268.
Caro, G. D., & Dorigo, M. (1998). Ant colonies
for adaptive routing in packet–switched communications networks. Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Parallel Problem Solving from
Nature. Amsterdam, Holland: Springer–Verlag.
Cohen, J. E., & Kelly, F. P. (1990). A Paradox of Congestion in a Queueing Network. Journal of Applied
Probability, 27, 730–734.
Cormen, T. H., Leiserson, C. E., & Rivest, R. L.
(1990). Introduction to Algorithms . MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Deo, N., & Pang, C. (1984). Shortest Path Algorithms:
Taxonomy and Annotation. Networks, 14, 275–323.
Dijkstra, E. (1956). A Note on Two Problems in Connection with Graphs. Canadian Journal of Mathematics, 8, 419–433.
Glynn, P. W. (1986). Stochastic Approximation for
Monte-Carlo Optimization. Proceedings of the 1986
Winter Simulation Conference (pp. 356–365).
Marbach, P., & Tsitsiklis, J. N. (1998). SimulationBased Optimization of Markov Reward Processes
(Technical Report). MIT.
Meuleau, N., Peshkin, L., Kaelbling, L. P., & Kim,
K.-E. (2000). Oﬀ-Policy Policy Search (Technical
Report TR-1713). MIT Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory.
Meuleau, N., Peshkin, L., Kim, K.-E., & Kaelbling,
L. P. (1999). Learning Finite-State Controllers for
Partially Observable Environments. Proceedings of
the Fifteenth International Conference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence .
Orda, A., Rom, R., & Sidi, M. (1993). Minimum Delay Routing in Multisatellite Networks. IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Networking , 1, 187–198.
Peshkin, L., Kim, K.-E., Meuleau, N., & Kaelbling,
L. P. (2000). Learning to Cooperate via Policy
Search. Proceedings of the Sixteenth International
Conference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence .
Reiman, M. I., & Weiss, A. (1986). Sensitivity Analysis via Likelihood Ratios. Proceedings of the 1986
Winter Simulation Conference .
Stone, P. (2000). TPOT-RL Applied to Network Routing. Proceedings of the Seventeenth International
Conference on Machine Learning .
Tanenbaum, A. S. (1996). Computer Networks . Prentice Hall International. 3 rd edition.
Tao, N. (2000). Walking the Path: An Application of
Policy-Gradient Reinforcement Learning to Network
Routing. Unpublished Honours Thesis. Department
of Computer Science, Australian National University. http://cs.anu.edu.au/∼ Nigel.Tao/thesis.ps.
Tumer, K., & Wolpert, D. H. (1999). Avoiding Braess’
Paradox through Collective Intelligence (Technical
Report). NASA Ames Research Center.
Williams, R. J. (1992). Simple Statistical GradientFollowing Algorithms for Connectionist Reinforcement Learning. Machine Learning, 8, 229–256.