Beneath the Heavens: A Thorough Measurement
Study of the Starlink Terrestrial Network
Yanbo Wu∗† , Mingxin Cui∗† B , Gaopeng Gou∗† , Yuhao Wei∗† ,
Gang Xiong∗† , Zhen Li∗† , Xinlei Ju∗† , Wei Xia∗†
∗ Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
† School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China

2025 IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Quality of Service (IWQoS) | 979-8-3315-4940-4/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/IWQOS65803.2025.11143359

{wuyanbo, cuimingxin, gougaopeng, weiyuhao, xionggang, lizhen, jvxinlei, xiawei}@iie.ac.cn

Abstract—The emerging low earth orbit (LEO) satellite Internet has gained worldwide popularity. Starlink, a prominent
LEO satellite Internet service provider, has attracted the most
users due to its low latency, wide coverage, and strong usability.
Current research on Starlink primarily focuses on the space
segment and its impact on network performance. However, as an
essential component, the architecture and unique features of the
Starlink Terrestrial Network (SLTN) are not well-explored, which
significantly affects the performance, security, and development
of the whole network. In this paper, we fill this gap by conducting
a thorough measurement study to profile the SLTN from various
aspects and reveal its potential effects, with specific attention to
the network assets, topology, and routing strategies.
We developed a novel framework including active and passive
measurement methods for collecting multiple network assets,
tracing different route paths, and scanning active service of the
SLTN. The open source intelligence was utilized for the first
time to collect extensive real-user network status. Leveraging
these techniques, we observed a rapid expansion of the Starlink
service with the latest network assets, collected in January 2025,
including over 23.5K /28 IP prefixes residing in 143 countries. We
mapped the consistent topology of the global Starlink Internet
access service and identified the specific IP addresses associated
with the four types of network routing nodes. Multiple internal
routing strategies were uncovered, which facilitate direct userto-user interactions. Particularly, we revealed the switches of
terrestrial infrastructure that users connected and the changes in
routing strategies, which should be considered in future quality
of service (QoS) evaluations. Our measurement also provides
methods for improving users’ perceptions and serves as a basis
for studies like security risk evaluation and service discovery.
Index Terms—Satellite-Terrestrial Integrated Network, Starlink, Internet Measurement

I. INTRODUCTION
Satellite Internet provides Internet access service by utilizing communication satellites, offering broadband access with
extensive coverage. Compared with geostationary satellites,
LEO satellites are positioned closer to the surface, which
reduces network latency and improves service quality [1].
Starlink, operated by SpaceX, has been publicly available since
February 2021, establishing a vast LEO satellite network that
serves over 100 countries and areas. By September 2024,
Starlink has deployed over 7K LEO satellites and reached
more than 4 million subscribers, making it the leading satellite
Internet service provider in terms of coverage, latency, and
user-friendliness. Moreover, Starlink has been utilized for
military communications during the Russo-Ukrainian War [2].

The Starlink network’s infrastructure consists of space and
terrestrial segments. The space segment is primarily composed
of a series of low-orbit satellites, while the terrestrial segment
encompasses the User Terminal, Ground Station (GS), and
Internet Point of Presence (PoP). Studies of the Starlink network primarily focus on the space segment. A large group of
researchers measured the performance of the Starlink network
from various aspects [13] [15] [16] and explored how spatial
factors, like weather and satellite coverage, affect the quality
of service (QoS) [11] [17]. Novel network protocols have
been designed to align with the performance requirements [21]
[22]. The terrestrial segment, as an essential component, is
also crucial in data transmission (Fig. 1). Its special network
architecture could greatly affect the QoS evaluation, security
analysis, and development of the whole Starlink network
ecosystem. However, to the best of our knowledge, there is
a significant lack of understanding of the terrestrial network
and the effects. Furthermore, insufficient comprehension has
already misled some applied research, such as the scanning of
irrelevant hosts in security risk evaluations [9] [10].
To fill this gap, we conducted a thorough measurement
study of the Starlink Terrestrial Network. Novel methods were
proposed to collect sufficient research data. We then presented
an in-depth analysis, with special attention to network assets,
topology, and routing strategies. The effect of the SLTN on
QoS evaluation, security, etc., is given significant attention.
Profiling the SLTN is by no means trivial since it is
a black-box system with a wide distribution and network
fluctuations. To this end, we proposed a specific measurement
framework with active and passive measurement methods
to collect effective research data. We applied Open Source
Intelligence (OSINT) to collect extensive real-user network
status data for the first time, addressing the challenge of limited volunteers while broadening measurement coverage. The
active measurement methods consist of StarCollect, a method
for collecting comprehensive network assets continuously and
automatically; StarTrace, a specialized network path tracing
method for discovering multiple route paths of the SLTN; and
StarScan, an active host scanning tool that efficiently identified
open services of important network routing nodes.
Leveraging the collected data, we profiled the SLTN from
various aspects, along with a set of insightful findings affecting
the QoS evaluation, security evaluations, etc. During our

979-8-3315-4940-4/25/$31.00 © 2025 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 20:00:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

II. BACKGROUND
Satellite Internet has emerged as a pivotal technology
for global connectivity, offering broadband access in remote
and underserved regions. Traditionally, geostationary satellites
have been the primary means of satellite-based Internet, providing wide coverage but facing high latency due to their distance. In contrast, low earth orbit satellites are positioned much
closer to the Earth’s surface, reducing latency and improving

Space
Segment

LEO
Satellite
KU-KA

Ground
Station

User
Terminal
Dish

Terrestrial
Segment

Ethernet

measurement between January 2023 and January 2025, we
observed a rapid expansion of the Starlink service according to
associated network assets. The latest data includes over 23.5K
/28 IP prefixes (a 48% growth), 290 domain names, and 6
autonomous systems (AS), residing in 143 countries and regions both supporting Starlink service and under construction.
Based on the statistics of five types of route paths, we mapped
the consistent topology of the global Starlink Internet access
service and identified four types of network routing nodes.
Besides, we proposed an efficient classification algorithm,
determining that 79.6% of the IP addresses were associated
with Starlink user nodes and 2.3% associated with the PoP
exit nodes. Moreover, multiple internal routing strategies were
identified, which facilitate direct user-to-user interactions without traditional Internet transit. More importantly, our findings
help to improve users’ perceptions of the current network
status, such as identifying the specific terrestrial infrastructure
they are connecting through the network path tracing method.
The measurement results on network architecture serve as a
basis for studies like security risk evaluations and service
discovery. For instance, we observed there were open BGP
and router management services exposed to the Internet, which
bring security risks and should be protected. In particular, we
revealed the switches of PoP that Starlink users connected and
the changes in routing strategies of the SLTN, which should
be considered in QoS measurements and evaluations.
The contributions of the paper are summarized as follows:
• New Techniques: We developed a specialized measurement
framework for the SLTN to collect associated network
assets, discover network route paths, and implement host
scanning. We first utilized OSINT to collect wide real-user
network status data. The framework provides novel insights
for the measurement of other satellite Internet systems.
• New Findings: We collected sufficient research data and
distilled a set of insightful findings specifically in network
assets, topology, and routing strategies of the SLTN.
• Practical Applications: We proposed practical applications.
Our study serves as a crucial basis for improving user
perception and studies like security risk evaluation. The
findings on routing variations also facilitate QoS evaluations.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: §II present
an overview of the Starlink network. In §III, we propose focused research questions and the corresponding measurement
methodology. §IV details our in-depth analysis of the SLTN.
The applications of our measurement study are shown in §V.
§VI presents the ethical issues. §VII summarizes previous
works related to the SLTN. §VIII concludes this paper.

Fiber

Network
Routing
Device at PoP

Static IP :
192.168.100.1
Net: 100.64.0.0/10
Gateway:
100.64.0.1

Router

Internet
Access

User

Internet
Fig. 1. The network infrastructure supporting the Starlink service in
each area. The orange lines represent the network transmission link of
the Internet Access Service.

overall service quality. Starlink, operated by SpaceX, LLC, has
been available to the public since February 2021. It has established a comprehensive network system with LEO satellites,
providing satellite Internet access to over 100 countries and
territories. Since early 2022, the Starlink program has emerged
as the preeminent Satellite Internet System regarding satellite
count and overall scale. As of September 2024, SpaceX has
successfully deployed over 7K LEO satellites and announced
reaching more than 4 million subscribers. Starlink emerged
as the preeminent satellite Internet system because of its
extensive coverage, low latency, and high user-friendliness.
Moreover, Starlink has been used in the Russo-Ukrainian
War for military communications [1] [2]. A military version,
Starshield, is designed for government use.
Fig. 1 illustrates the infrastructure of Starlink and the
entire data transmission with network information. To enable
Internet access, data is exchanged among several neighboring
infrastructures [2]. In this study, the SLTN refers to the network based on the interconnections of the Starlink terrestrial
segment infrastructure.
The user is required to acquire a user terminal to access
the Starlink network. Data packets originating from the user’s
PC are transmitted through the user terminal as KU-KA band
signals to a satellite. This satellite subsequently relays the
packets to a nearby GS. The GS then routes these packets
via wired fiber to a connected PoP, which forwards them to
the Internet [3]. The details are summarized as follows.
User Terminal. The user terminal comprises a router and a
dish connected via Ethernet. It converts the Ethernet packets
from the user’s network devices into satellite signals in the
KU-KA band and transmits them to the LEO satellite. The
router’s WAN port acquires network addresses by parsing
DHCP packets from the Starlink network. Owing to the
scarcity of IPv4 resources, Starlink employs CGNAT technology. Regular users receive private IP addresses, whereas
premium users can switch to dedicated public IP addresses.
Following the Starlink routing algorithm, the dish converts
users’ Ethernet frames and sends them to a specific satellite.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 20:00:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

StarScan

StarCollect
OSINT Search

Real-users’ Public IPs

Network Assets
Classification Algorithm
Network
Assets
Databse

Real-user Network Status
Official Certificate

Domain-based
Iterative Strategy

Network Nodes’ IP

ICMP and SYN
SCAN: Open Ports

Fingerprints of Key
Network Nodes

ZGrab, Nmap:
Banners and Services

StarTrace
GS and PoP Locations
Selected Probes
Internet Repository

AS Path, Origin AS,
IP Geolocation, Domains

① Passive measurement

Enhanced
Path Tracing
Technique with
ICMP, Http,
and DNS Query

(1) Internet Servers
(2) Starlink Probes
(3) Active Hosts

In-depth and Continuous Analyses
5 types of
Potential Paths

ü
ü
ü
ü

Network Assets
Topology
Multiple Routing Strategies
Unique Features

② Active measurement methods for network assets, route paths and fingerprints.

Fig. 2. Our measurement framework with active and passive measurement methods.

Satellite and Ground Station. After receiving user data, the
satellite selects a specific nearby GS and transmits the data to
that GS via KU-KA band signals. However, wireless signals
have inherent distance limitations. For example, satellites over
the US cannot directly communicate with the GS in Europe.
Starlink has deployed over 150 GS worldwide to expand its
service coverage. Meanwhile, Starlink is exploring reducing
the number of GS with the technique of inter-satellite laser
link (ISL). ISL is still under evaluation and experiment with
limited scale, we do not consider its impact in this paper [2].
Internet Point of Presence. The GS employs wired fiber to
transmit data packets to network routing devices at the PoP.
Specifically, these routing devices bridge the internal Starlink
network to the Internet
III. STUDY DESIGN AND METHODOLOGY
We first proposed focused research questions (RQ) for
profiling the SLTN. To meet the needs of this measurement
study, we designed a specialized framework to collect various
data, with active and passive measurement methods. The data
was utilized for in-depth analysis of the SLTN in §IV and will
facilitate further applications and research discussed in §V.
A. Research Questions
Our research is driven by the following RQs:
RQ1: The Network Assets. As a crucial component and an
identifier of a network system, we wonder what network assets
are associated with the SLTN, including AS information, IP
addresses, domain names, and other network identifiers. The
network assets and their attributes can also reveal the scale,
distribution, and key characteristics of the SLTN system.
RQ2: The Internet Access Topology. Starlink has constructed
a novel Internet access network. We wonder about the characteristics of the topology, including identifying connectivity
relationships among important network routing nodes and their
unique roles. The effect of this type of topology on QoS is
also an interesting topic.
RQ3: Network Assets Classification. We wonder whether
there is an effective approach to classify a public IP address
to its associated network routing node within the SLTN. The
classification has important applications in fingerprinting and
finding potential security risks via active network services.

RQ4: Multiple Routing Strategies. The Starlink service has
an extensive distribution. We wonder whether multiple internal
routing strategies are supported to facilitate direct user-to-user
interactions without traditional Internet transit.
B. Challenges and Methodology Overview
Due to the characteristics of the Starlink network, we
encountered several challenges in collecting research data.
• Starlink is a closed-source system with a lack of transparency in network protocols and routing algorithms, making traditional measurement methods inapplicable.
• The high deployment cost of user terminals poses challenges
to the traditional measurement way of deploying widespread
network probes. An efficient approach is required to collect
extensive real-user data.
• The ongoing development of Starlink necessitates specific
methods to continuously and effectively monitor the changes
in network infrastructure and network resources.
• The movement of LEO satellites and other potential factors
lead to network fluctuations, including latency and data
packet reachability, which means specialized methods are
required to ensure data reliability.
These factors were critical considerations throughout our
methodology design. In short, as shown in Fig. 2, we proposed
an automated framework StarCollect for collecting multidimensional network assets continuously and automatically, a
specialized network path tracing method StarTrace for discovering multiple route paths, and an active host scanning tool
StarScan that efficiently discovers active network services. In
addition to the active measurement methods, we are the first to
leverage OSINT to obtain real users’ network status, mitigating
the lack of volunteers while extending the measurement coverage. Other relevant datasets include GS and POP Locations,
AS Path, Origin AS, IP Geolocation, and Passive DNS. A
detailed explanation is provided below.
C. Active Measurement
a) StarCollect: We designed a framework, StarCollect,
for the collection of a wide range of network assets from
multiple aspects, ultimately creating a comprehensive Network
Asset Database (NADB). In other words, StarCollect implements a binary classification algorithm to distinguish network

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 20:00:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I
T HE N ETWORK P ROBES W ITHIN T HE SLTN.
Country
US
FR
CA
DE
GB
IT
AU

# Number
21
11
8
6
4
3
3

Country
BE
NL
HT
CL
KI
CO
ES

# Number
2
2
2
2
2
1
1

Country
MG
JP
HU
CZ
PL
GR
BJ

TABLE II
S ELECTED P ROBES AND TARGETS FOR N ETWORK PATH T RACING .
# Number
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

resources associated with Starlink from other networks. The
database contains SLTN-related network identifiers including
IP addresses, autonomous systems, domain names, IP geolocations, etc. Specifically, StarCollect can continuously and
automatically monitor network assets’ changes.
The input of StarCollect is a number of Starlink realusers’ public IP addresses from our OSINT data. We then
use an iterative algorithm to collect the whole assets. At the
initial stage, we utilize the Origin AS data to map the input
to their corresponding AS. The IP addresses announced by
these AS are then inserted into the database. Our iterative
strategy is based on the following domain-level insight: (1)
We found 95% of the input IP addresses were associated with
domains in the format of customer.*.{pop, mc}.starlinkisp.net,
subdomains of starlink.isp.net. (2) The rest IP addresses are
associated with undefined.hostname.localhost. Consequently,
the next step is to retrieve the subdomains of starlinkisp.net
and their associated IP addresses with the Passive DNS dataset.
The initial stage will be repeated until no new IPs are inserted
into the database, indicating the algorithm has reached convergence. We classify these IP addresses using a prefix length of
28 for ease of data deduplication. Additionally, we looked up
IP geolocations as part of the database using the IP Geolocation dataset. The NADB constructed by StarCollect not only
provides information on ASs, IP addresses, domain names,
and IP geolocations but also details the relationship mapping
among these different types of assets. The database proved
effective through subsequent in-depth analyses in §IV-C.
Metadata of the NADB. Since 2023, we have been continuously collecting the data. We show the metadata for three key
time points. In May 2023, we observed 15,804 /28 IP prefixes,
266 hostnames, and associated 107 countries and areas. In May
2024, the number is 20,828; 278; and 130. In January 2025,
the number is 23,562; 290; and 143. A comprehensive analysis
of the NADB is presented in §IV-A.
b) StarTrace: Considering the fluctuations of the Starlink
network, we designed a specialized network path tracing
method StarTrace. It was used to discover multiple potentially supported route paths in the Starlink network and the
corresponding route-level network information.
StarTrace uses a route-tracing technique based on TTLlimited probes [26]. We employed the following improvements to address the corresponding issues: (1) In the Starlink network, the TTL response strategy adopted by network
routing nodes may cause traditional techniques to fail. We

Index

Potential Route Paths

Path-1

Starlink user → Internet

Starlink user terminals controlled cloud servers

Path-2

Internet → Starlink user

controlled cloud servers Starlink user terminals

Path-3 Starlink users under the same GS
Path-4

Starlink users under different
GS but the same PoP

Path-5 Starlink users under different PoPs

Probe

Target

Starlink users from the same city
Starlink users of the same IP geolocation
from nearby cities
Starlink users of the same different IP
geolocations from different countries

complemented the responses using ICMP ECHO packets,
DNS queries, and HTTP GET requests. These diverse packets
can effectively provide additional route path information and
bypass potential network firewalls. (2) We found that the
Starlink network’s high fluctuations can lead to significant
variability in tracing results, specifically route paths and
network latency. To enhance stability, we perform repeated
path tracings. Experiments showed that over 80% of the
path tracing results were consistent after repeating the tests
continuously more than 15 times. This experiment result was
true for different times throughout the day. Consequently, we
selected the most frequent paths from the 15 identical path
tracings and calculated the average network latency.
Before the start of StarTrace, based on the potential communication link we want to discover, we need to carefully
select a probe for sending tracing packets and a target IP
address. First, we gathered a set of sufficient network resources
for probing: (1) Internet Servers: 7 cloud servers deployed
in five across Asia, Europe, Oceania, South America, and
North America. (2) Active Hosts: IP addresses of active hosts
within the Starlink network identified by StarScan. (3) Starlink
Probes: Ripe public probes which are voluntarily hosted by
Starlink users [39] [40]. We used a total of 70 probes across
over 20 countries, illustrated in Table I. Each Ripe probe also
offers the public IP address and their city-level geographical
location. (4) Specific volunteers with Starlink user terminals
recruited in specific countries. Next, as illustrated in Table II,
we carefully defined five distinct types of route paths that
Starlink may potentially support and selected appropriate
probes and detection targets for each path. PATH-1 presents
the link from Starlink users to Internet servers. Thus, we used
Starlink Probes to visit Internet servers. PATH-2 presents the
link from Internet servers to Starlink users. Thus, we used
Internet servers to visit Active Hosts. PATH-3 presents the
communication link of users under the same GS. Based on our
analysis in §IV-A and §IV-B, we recruited Starlink volunteers
from the same city with the same IP geolocation to visit each
other. PATH-4 presents the link of users under different GS
but the same PoP. Correspondingly, we recruited volunteers
who had the same IP geolocations but from nearby cities in
the country. PATH-5 presents the link of users under different
PoPs. We used Starlink Probes of the different IP geolocations
from different countries to visit each other.
We conducted a large-scale path tracing since early 2023,
sending a total of over 50K probe packets to obtain various

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 20:00:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

route paths. According to our subsequent statistical analysis
in §IV-D, our selected probes and path tracing targets proved
to be effective. In other words, the tracing results’ statistics of
the same route path are consistent, but statistics of different
potential route paths are significantly different, which ensures
the reliability of StarTrace.
c) StarScan: We developed an active host scanning tool
StarScan. The tool efficiently scans for active hosts and
extracts host features, including device banners and specific
services hosted on open ports.
StarScan integrates several existing active scanning techniques. We first send ICMP and TCP SYN probe packets to
scan the first 1024 ports of the target device to determine open
ports. Next, Nmap [32] is used to send up to 16 different
TCP, UDP, and ICMP probe packets to these open ports,
aiming to elicit a response from the device and capture a
potential device banner. Based on the accumulated database
of fingerprints, Nmap then provides a detailed explanation of
the services hosted on the device. We also used Shodan [47],
which regularly scans over 1,500 ports of nearly all Internet
hosts, to find additional service information.
To mitigate the impact of geographic factors on the measurement [38], we purchased 7 cloud servers in five regions across
Asia, Europe, and North America, and performed scanning
on the IPv4 addresses collected by starCollect. We found the
active hosts changed rapidly, and there were over 64.9K open
ports during our scanning in January 2025. Meanwhile, in
early 2023, the number was only 3.7K.
D. Passive Measurement
This section explains our passive measurement, specifically
collecting effective data from different open source platforms.
Open Source Intelligence. The Starlink network has an
extensive terrestrial infrastructure worldwide. Undoubtedly,
deploying numerous probes through volunteer recruitment is
cost-prohibitive. To this end, we are the first to utilize open
source intelligence to gather information on the Starlink IP
address allocation and network routing. OSINT comprises
information from publicly accessible sources such as government documents, news reports, social media, etc. We collected
network status from Starlink real users from over 20 countries,
which improves both the comprehensiveness and accuracy
of our measurement. Furthermore, variations in OSINT data
could indicate the developmental trajectory of the SLTN. The
ethical issues will be discussed later.
We utilized the following tricks to collect effective network
information. Firstly, we observed that Starlink users often test
network performance using traceroute [26] to Internet hosts
and share the results in the community [23] - [25]. Since the
default gateway of the user router and the terrestrial gateway
are officially configured as 192.168.100.1 and 100.64.0.1 respectively [5], we used these two IP addresses as keywords for
searching within the community, including posting, comment,
and media section. Overall, we manually collected a total of
87 users’ traceroute results. Furthermore, a few Starlink users
inadvertently exposed their public IP address and geographic

location while addressing network issues. We conducted a
keyword search to collect the data, focusing on keywords
including ’DHCP’, ’network troubleshot’, ’public IP’, etc. In
addition, several Starlink users, serving as network probes,
have voluntarily disclosed their public IP addresses and citylevel geographic locations [39] [40]. Overall, we manually
collected a total of 120 users’ public IP addresses and corresponding geographic locations covering over 20 countries
and regions across six continents.
Based on the OSINT data, we also inferred that the Starlink
operator implemented a standardized adjustment to the SLTN
network architecture at the end of 2022. During the data
cleaning, we found that users’ traceroute results released
before December 2022 were significantly different from those
afterward. The route paths released after 2023 show significant
statistical consistency, discussed in §IV-B, whereas pre-2022
data displays variability. Thus, the OSINT data we used above
in this study was all released in 2024 or later to reflect the
latest network architecture.
GS and PoP Location. Areas with access to the Starlink service necessitate supporting ground infrastructure and network
resources. The collection of GS and PoP locations helps to understand the service scale and associated network assets. Our
collection primarily stems from several novel observations.
Firstly, the construction of GS requires legal authorization. For
example, in the US, the Federal Communications Commission
is empowered to issue these access certificates [27]. Besides,
for the construction of PoP, network exchange centers typically
maintain records of network edge node deployments [34].
Secondly, volunteers report the infrastructure construction in
Starlink user communities [23] - [25]. Additionally, social
media also contribute to this dataset [28]. After de-duplicating
the data, we amassed 137 GS worldwide and 27 PoP in 16
countries with city-level locations and registration details.
AS Path and Origin AS. To map an IP address to its original
AS, we utilized the data published by Routeviews [29] to
extract the AS paths of each IP prefix. We collected metadata
from Thyme [30] to ensure data accuracy. In instances of
inconsistency, we manually validated a small sample of AS
paths to minimize errors through traceroute [26].
IP Geolocation and Passive DNS. IP geolocation refers to
the process of determining the geographical location of an
Internet-connected device based on its IP address, utilizing
WHOIS records, network routing data, etc. IPinfo [31] is a
trusted IP data provider. We utilized IPinfo’s data to map an
IP address to its IP geolocation (country, city, etc.) and find
associated domain names.
IV. IN-DEPTH ANALYSIS OF
THE STARLINK TERRESTRIAL NETWORK
We analyzed the collected research data from various aspects to report an in-depth analysis of the SLTN and answer
the RQs proposed in §III-A.
A. The Network Assets
StarCollect had classified the network assets associated with
the SLTN. The latest NADB (January 2025), as shown in

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 20:00:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

boring countries. For instance, one user geographically located
in Mongolia had an accurate IP geolocation of Mongolia,
where the IP geolocation service providers may correct the
data through WHOIS [46].
(a) Distribution.

(b) Metadata.

Fig. 3. Metadata of the Starlink network assets.

Fig. 3, mainly included over 23.5K /28 IP prefixes, 290 domain
names, and the city-level geographic locations of these network identifiers. These network assets are associated with 143
countries and regions, including 113 regions Starlink service
has officially supported and those under construction [6]. We
correlated these assets from various aspects to reveal the scale,
distribution, and characteristics of the SLTN.
The SLTN is associated with several different ASs, including SpaceX AS14593 AS45700 AS27277, Google AS36492,
and Trans-System INC AS14597. This discovery confirms
Starlink’s public statements regarding its collaboration with
network operators like Google, to provide faster Internet
access service [33]. AS14593 is central to the SLTN. On
the one hand, it has the most significant asset scale, with an
announcement of 329,984 IPs across 131 countries, demonstrating the global coverage of the Starlink service. On the
other hand, §IV-C indicates that over 95% of the critical
network nodes, that we identified, use IP addresses originating
from AS14593. AS14593 peers with over 370 ASs, including
29 upstreams and only four downstream [33] [17], aligned
with typical ISP design practices [42]. This indicates that the
Starlink network, as an ISP, is designed to offer the best
possible service to its customers. In addition, we detected
several ASs through the identifiers (SpaceX, Starlink, etc.),
including SpaceX AS27277, Starlink AS142475, and SpaceX
AS397763. However, these ASs were only observed in the
OSINT data up to December 2021 and are not included in
our latest network asset database, possibly phased out due
to the development of the Starlink network. Meanwhile, the
growth in network assets highlights the ongoing evolution of
the Starlink network systems. Compared with January 2023,
there has been a 48% increase in the number of associated IP
addresses, a 52% rise in the number of countries covered, and
an 182% growth in the regions providing services.
In addition, we preliminarily explored the locations of the
real Starlink users with OSINT data. We noted that there is a
notable disparity, where 96% of users’ IP geolocation (public
IP addresses) corresponds to a geographically proximate PoP
rather than their real geographic location. For instance, one
Starlink user geographically located in Birmingham had an IP
geolocation of Atlanta, where a PoP is situated. We attributed
this disparity to the limitations of existing IP geolocation methods, most of which can only provide PoP-level accuracy [45].
Meanwhile, geographically proximate users shared the same
nearby PoP, which aligns with the Starlink working principle.
The other 4% of the Starlink users were from countries without
Starlink infrastructure, relying on the infrastructure of neigh-

Answer to RQ1: The SLTN is associated with a few
AS operated by SpaceX and its partners and with
multiple network assets including over 23.5K /28 IP
prefixes. The global AS14593 plays a crucial role,
reflecting typical ISP features. The significant distribution (143 countries) and the increase in network assets
indicate a rapid expansion of the Starlink service.

B. The Internet Access Topology
Using StarTrace, we got the route paths from Starlink users
to Internet servers (Path-1) and the paths from Internet servers
to Starlink users (Path-2). Table III illustrates the statistics
of these route paths, including network routing nodes and IP
prefixes. Subsequently, we analyzed these statistics to map the
Starlink Internet access topology and uncovered the switch of
the PoP Starlink users connected.
While different regions rely on separate infrastructure and
network resources, their topological statistics are consistent.
We presented the mapped Starlink Internet access network
topology in Fig. 4, based on Table III. The topology indicates
that Path-1 and Path-2 demonstrate a distinct symmetry, with
adjacent network routing nodes belonging to the same network. The finding aligns with the bidirectional communication
behavior. Through querying the ASN, we discovered that the
data packets, transmitted from Hop 0, passed through three
routing nodes within the Starlink network (AS14593). The
IP address of each routing node is associated with specific
IP prefixes. Hops 0 to Hop 2 belong to the internal Starlink
network utilizing private IP addresses, while Hop 3 serves as
the connection point between the Starlink network and the
Internet. Specifically, Hop 0 (user node) represents the router
of Starlink users, Hop 1 (gateway node) serves as the user’s
default gateway [5], and Hop 3 (exit node) corresponds to a
network device at the PoP. We refer to Hop 2 as link node. The
network latency from Hop 0 to Hop 1 always accounts for over
67% of the total within the internal network (Hop 0 to Hop
3), which is attributed to satellite wireless communication.
We then conducted further exploration of IP geolocation
and network latency. Based on the topology, Starlink users
can identify the PoP they connect to by querying the IP
geolocation of the hop 4 exit node. Through this method, we
observed there were switches of the PoP that users connected.
For instance, Starlink users in Mongolia connected to the PoP
in Germany before October 2024, but afterward, it switched
to Japan. We double-checked the switch with network latency
from our cloud server in Berlin, Germany, which increased
from an average of 160.63 ms to 411.93 ms. The observation
also indicated that the switch of the connected PoP can affect
the network latency.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 20:00:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE III
THE ROUTE PATHS S TATISTICS OF S TARLINK I NTERNET ACCESS S ERVICE .
HOP

Path-1

0

1

2

{User}

100.64.0.1

172.16.0.0/16

User Node Gateway Node
Path-2

{User}

{no response}

(reverse) User Node Gateway Node
NOTE

/

Private IPs

3

4

Link Node

206.224.64.0/19,
149.19.108.0/23
Exit Node

206.224.64.0/19,
149.19.108.0/23
Link Node

206.224.64.0/19,
149.19.108.0/23
Exit Node

{Internet}
/

{Internet}
/

Private IPs and
Internet and
Public IPs of AS14593
Public IPs of AS14593
other ASs

PATH-1 presents the link from Starlink users to Internet servers.
PATH-2 presents the link from Internet servers to Starlink users.

Internet

PoP Exit Node
( Device at the PoP )

Logical Link

Static IP of PoP:
206.224.64.0/19
149.19.108.0/23

Net:
206.224.64.0/19
149.19.108.0/23

Physical Link
Link Node

User Node

Gateway Node

Net:
172.16.0.0/16

( Router )

Net:
100.64.0.0/10

Fig. 4. The topology of the Starlink Internet access service.

Answer to RQ2: The global Starlink Internet access
service has a consistent topology. It consists of four
essential network routing nodes, collectively forming
the link from the internal network to the Internet. Each
routing node exhibits a unique consistency regarding
IP addresses. Through the topology, we found there
were switches of the users’ connected PoP, which
could affect the network latency.
C. Network Assets Classification
We here introduce an effective rule-based heuristic algorithm to classify a given public IP address to the associated
SLTN network routing node. The algorithm, illustrated in Algorithm 1, helps us understand the role of each type of network
routing node and facilitates security evaluation studies. We
verified the accuracy of the algorithm by analyzing the network
services that each type of routing node hosted.
For determining the associated IP addresses of user nodes,
in addition to PATH-2 path tracing, we can utilize RFC
8805 Standard [35] that Starlink follows. In other words,
Starlink periodically publishes a set of public IP addresses,
which is claimed to be reserved for Starlink users to improve
the user experience [36]. Notably, we discovered that these
released IP addresses of RFC 8805 constitute a subset of
our NADB. Furthermore, the domain format, customer.*.{pop,
mc}.starlinkisp.net and undefined.hostname.localhost, is another key factor. The determination of exit nodes is primally
based on the statistics of path tracing illustrated in Table III.
StarCollect implemented the algorithm in our NADB. The
result showed that each IP address was determined uniquely to
one type of network routing node. Specifically, 79.6% of the
IP addresses are associated with user nodes, 2.3% with exit
nodes, and the rest are not associated with any node, possibly
deprecated or for other unknown uses.

Algorithm 1 Network Assets Classification
Input: A Public IP in the NADB
Output: The Associated Network Routing Node
1: Domain ← PassiveDNS(IP)
2: N ameSet ← {*.starlinkisp.net, *.hostname.localhost}
3: U serSet ← Store(StarlinkRFC8805)
4: ExitSet ← { 206.224.64.0/19, 149.19.108.0/23 }
5: if IP in U serSet and Domain in N ameSet then
6:
RouteP ath ← PathTracing(IP)
7:
if IP matches HOP 0 in RouteP ath then
8:
Return User Node
9:
end if
10: end if
11: if IP in ExitSet then
12:
RouteP ath ← PathTracing(IP)
13:
if IP matches HOP 2 or HOP 3 in RouteP ath then
14:
Return Exit Node
15:
end if
16: end if
17: Return Unknown Network Node

We confirmed the reliability of this classification algorithm
through the active network services. We conducted host scanning of the IP addresses associated with the user nodes and exit
nodes through StarScan. The results indicated that there were
over 64k open ports of user nodes. The top services hosted
in these ports are HTTP (24.5%), the services of wireless
routers (7.3%), and SSH (6.5%), which are typically hosted by
individual users rather than network devices. However, for exit
nodes, only 9 open ports hosting BGP service were detected,
which was used for interaction with other ASs. We inferred
that network protection measures have been implemented to
prevent the vital routing nodes from scanning. Moreover, we
searched the Starlink router’s default IP address 192.168.1.1
in the device banners. Several management interfaces of the
Starlink router were found exposed to the public Internet, potentially allowing external attackers to manipulate them easily.
While the risk has been revealed in previous studies [43], it
remains prevalent.
Answer to RQ3: We proposed an efficient classification algorithm, determining that 79.6% of the IP
addresses in the NADB were associated with user
nodes and 2.3% with the exit nodes. These two types of
routing nodes hosted over 64K open services, mostly
related to Web and SSH. Meanwhile, the exposed BGP
and router management services brought security risks.
D. The Multiple Routing Strategies
In this section, we first identified the routing strategies
implemented to facilitate the internal communication of Starlink users. The analysis also revealed the Starlink internal
backbone network, as observed in previous research [7]. Then,
we explored the routing strategy presented by this backbone

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 20:00:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE IV
S TATISTICS OF THE P OTENTIAL ROUTE PATHS W E IDENTIFIED WITHIN THE SLTN.

HOP
Path-3

0
{User}
User Node

1
100.64.0.1
Gateway Node

2
{Target}
User Node

3

4

5

6

206.224.64.0/19,
206.224.64.0/19,
172.16.0.0/16
{Target}
149.19.108.0/23
149.19.108.0/23
User Node
Gateway Node
Link Node
Exit Node
Link Node
Gateway Node
User Node
206.224.64.0/19,
206.224.64.0/19,
206.224.64.0/19,
{User}
100.64.0.1
172.16.0.0/16
...
Path-5
149.19.108.0/23
149.19.108.0/23
149.19.108.0/23
User Node
Gateway Node
Link Node
Exit Node
Exit Node
Exit Node
...
PATH-3 presents the communication link of Starlink users under the same GS. PATH-4 presents the link under different GS but
the same PoP. PATH-5 presents the link different PoP.
Path-4

{User}

100.64.0.1

172.16.0.0/16

network. The result disclosed that there were changes in the
Starlink backbone routing strategies, which could also impact
the network latency.
Using StarTrace, we obtained different routing paths including communications of Starlink users under the same GS
(Path-3), users under different GS but the same PoP (Path4), and users under different PoP (Path-5). The statistics of
these routing paths are illustrated in Table IV. The pathtracing results indicate that Starlink supports a variety of
routing strategies for internal communication. Each type of
routing strategy exhibits distinct routing paths. We presented
a simplified diagram with the discovered route paths in Fig. 5.
Specifically, communications between users under the same
GS typically complete at the gateway node, without the routing
of the upstream network. Conversely, communications between users at different GS depend on network transit through
the link nodes and exit nodes. Furthermore, we observed
there were logical connections between PoP exit nodes of
different areas, enabling user communication under different
PoP without Internet transit. In other words, Starlink has constructed an internal backbone network, connecting the PoP exit
nodes across the world, which may enhance data transmission
efficiency. It also clarifies the reason why exit nodes worldwide
are assigned IP addresses of the same subnets, 206.224.64.0/19
and 149.19.108.0/23. We also identified the MPLS method
deployed within the backbone through ICMP trace [44]. It is
noteworthy that Pan et al. [7] have consistently measured the
backbone topology through the recruitment of volunteers.
Based on the architecture of the Starlink backbone network,
we inferred that several specific routing strategies were designed to optimize the communication from Internet users to
Starlink users. The inference was validated through the following case study. In our analysis of routing paths from our cloud
server in Berlin to the active Starlink hosts in Seattle. We found
the probe packets first reached the PoP exit node in Frankfurt
during April and May 2024. The Starlink backbone then routed
the packets to Seattle via the PoP in Chicago (Probe→Starlink
backbone→Target). However, after June 2024, the routing
paths changed back to the traditional strategy, which means
the probe packets reached the POP in Seattle directly through
Internet transit (Probe→Internet→Target). The average latency

Internet
9,
4.0/1 3
24.6
/2
206.2 .19.108.0
9
or 14

[The Network under PoP]
User

Gateway

Link Node

PoP

206.2
or 14 24.64.0
/1
9.19
.108 9,
.0/23

The Starlink Backbone
PoP

User

Gateway

[The Network under PoP]

PoP

9,
4.0/1 3
24.6
/2
206.2 .19.108.0
9
or 14

PoP

Link Node

User

User

Gateway

Link Node

Path-1 and Path-2

Path-3

Path-4

Path-5

Internet

Fig. 5. The topology diagram of the whole SLTN and the multiple route paths
that Starlink supports to facilitate diverse communication needs. (Path-1 and
Path-2: Internet Access Service, Path-3: communication of users under the
same GS, Path-4: users under different GS but the same PoP, Path-5: users
under different PoP).

of the optimized routing strategy (135.20 ms) is 79.43%
of the traditional (170.21 ms). We also observed a similar
optimization in the path tracing from Berlin to Sydney. In
summary, we found potential changes in the routing strategies
of the Starlink backbone, which had impacted the latency.
Answer to RQ4: Starlink has developed multiple
internal routing strategies and a specific backbone network to facilitate direct user-to-user interactions without traditional Internet transit. Each strategy employed
a distinct routing path to meet diverse communication
requirements. We found there were changes in routing
strategies, which affected the network latency.
V. APPLICATION AND FUTURE WORK
Our measurement profiled a closed-source network system
for researchers. This work is non-trivial and has the following practical applications. It also gives inspiration to future
measurement studies of the SLTN.
For Starlink users, our measurement helps to improve users’
perceptions of the current network status. We noticed several
users complained that the network performance varied each
time they used Starlink, which may be attributed to being
assigned a poor network link temporarily. Through the path
tracing method of PATH-1 and the IP geolocation of HOP

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 20:00:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3, the location of the connected PoP will be easily identified
from the user’s view. It also acts as an indication of ISL if
the connected PoP is far from the user. These measures assist
users in reporting and troubleshooting network issues. We are
working on a user-friendly tool to display the current network
link and network status.
For service discovery and security risk evaluation of the
SLTN, we provide reliable base data including the standardized
NADB and the algorithm for classifying network assets. The
data revisions mitigated the errors of active services due
to irrelevant scanning targets as input [9]. With the exact
usage of the network assets, network service discovery engines
can avoid the large-scale scanning of critical network nodes.
Furthermore, our study also develops network fingerprints
for essential network routing nodes, including IP address,
active service, IP geolocation, and the specific role within the
network. These fingerprints will help researchers identify and
track the security risks within the system. For instance, we
found the open BGP and router management services exposed
to the Internet, which had been protected.
For QoS evaluation, previous studies ignored the effect
of the Starlink terrestrial segment on the whole network.
However, we found there were periodic switches of PoP
that Starlink users connected and periodic changes in routing
strategies of the SLTN. These two factors were both observed
to cause significant variations in network latency. We believe
it is highly necessary to track and monitor the network routing
path while recording the performance, which helps to assess
how other factors like weather and satellite movement affect
QoS more accurately.
Furthermore, we propose several perspectives for future
measurement. In topology recovery of the Starlink backbone,
studies still highly rely on the user volunteers as probes [7].
As detailed in §IV-D, we observed that, due to the particular
BGP policy, part of the routing paths from Internet servers to
the Starlink users traversed the Starlink backbone network. It
means that regular Internet probes are also feasible for recovering the topology with a large-scale external measurement.
Besides, the exact countries and areas that each PoP covers
should be measured and analyzed in depth, which helps us
understand the routing strategies of the whole network. In
addition, the frequency and triggers of the changes in SLTN
routing strategies have also not been carefully investigated.
VI. E THICS
Our path-tracing and host-scanning strictly relied on and
followed the guidelines outlined in the Menlo and Belmont
reports [37]. The sending rate of probe packets in our measurement was controlled, which was suggested by previous similar
measurement work [41] and had little resource consumption.
Besides, our research is strictly based on data collection
and analysis. The OSINT we used does not include existing academic publications or technical reports, and we have
clarified potential overlaps and their differences. In addition,
we carefully examined whether the OSINT data collected
from the Internet was released voluntarily by individuals

and organizations. The analysis of users’ previous network
status was of a large user base statistically, with no focus on
individuals. The user’s privacy was not compromised.
VII. RELATED WORK
In this section, we provide an overview of the previous
research related to the SLTN.
Architecture Measurement. During the same period of our
study, Pan et al. [7] provided an empirical explanation of how
Starlink works, including Starlink access networks, gateway,
PoP structures, etc. However, the study lacks a systematic and
specific measurement methodology and robust data analysis,
which severely undermines the accuracy of the results. The
explanation is also limited to the users’ views, based on
the observations of Starlink user volunteers. In our study,
we proposed a set of specialized methods and conducted a
systematic measurement of the SLTN. We not only profiled
this closed network system from various aspects, but also
developed a standardized dataset and effective classification
algorithms of network assets based on real network status and
topology. We also highlight the practical applications of our
findings in future studies on security, QoS evaluations, etc.
Security Evaluation. In service discovery and security risk
evaluation, Zhang et al. [8] proposed an efficient method
for detecting various types of servers and their open services within the Starlink network. ZoomEye [9] performed
an active host scan on some IP addresses associated with
Starlink and gave statistics on the open services. Kareem
et al. [18] analyzed the cybersecurity landscape surrounding
Starlink, with a focus on identifying potential threats, assessing
associated risks, and proposing mitigation strategies to bolster
the resilience of the network. Tieby et al. [19] conducted an
empirical study, revealing illicit scanning events, Mirai-based
infections, source address spoofing, etc. Nonetheless, these
works frequently scanned numerous network resources irrelevant to the SLTN, leading to erroneous service listings. Little
attention is paid to constructing a reliable and comprehensive
network assets dataset.
QoS Measurement. In QoS measurement and evaluation, a
considerable amount of research has focused on evaluating
the performance of the Starlink network from multiple dimensions, such as bandwidth, round-trip time, and one-way
delay [12] [13] [15] [16]. These studies have also identified
characteristics such as the internal adjustment every 15 seconds [14]. Traditional research is conducted with specialized
hardware or recruiting large numbers of satellite Internet
customers. In comparison, Izhikevich et al. [12] proposed
HitchHiking, a methodology that provides global visibility into
LEO. HitchHiking is the first job mainly based on Internetexposed services that use LEO Internet and completed the
most extensive study to date of Starlink network latency.
Furthermore, studies have investigated how spatial factors,
including weather and satellite coverage, affect the QoS [11]
[17]. We note that these studies did not typically take the
network status of the SLTN as a factor affecting QoS, whereas
our findings revealed that the status was not stable.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 20:00:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VIII. CONCLUSION
Starlink has emerged as a preeminent satellite Internet
service provider with LEO satellites. We noticed the terrestrial segment, as an essential component of the Starlink
network, gained less attention from researchers. In this paper,
we conducted a thorough measurement study to profile the
SLTN and reveal its potential effects. Since the SLTN is
a closed-source and widely distributed system with network
fluctuations, a specific measurement framework was proposed
to collect various research data. A set of novel findings was
then distilled through in-depth data analysis. We presented the
scale, distribution, and features of the network assets, mapped
the consistent topology, and identified four types of routing
nodes. An effective algorithm was proposed to classify the
network assets. We also uncovered multiple internal routing
strategies. Particularly, we emphasized and demonstrated the
practical applications of our measurement. We observed the
switches of terrestrial infrastructure and the changes in routing
strategies, which should be considered in QoS evaluations.
It also provides insights for improving users’ perceptions
and studies like security risk evaluation. Moving forward,
we believe it is necessary to continuously monitor the SLTN
architecture and its behavior. Further research on Starlink
needs to get a more comprehensive view of the terrestrial
segment and carefully consider its effect.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We sincerely thank all potential ”volunteers” in Starlink
communities who inadvertently shared their network status on
social media to help improve the QoS. We are grateful to the
anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments. This work
is supported by the project (No. E3H02611E1) of the National
Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Blind Signal
Processing (No. 23007522).
R EFERENCES
[1] Wikipedia, “Satellite Internet Access,” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sa
tellite Internet access, 2024
[2] Wikipedia, “Starlink,” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Starlink, 2024
[3] Starlink, “Starlink,” https://www.starlink.com/, 2024
[4] Starlink, “Starlink Satellite Technology,” https://www.starlink.com/tec
hnology, 2024
[5] Starlink, “Starlink Help Center,” https://www.starlink.com/support, 2024
[6] Starlink, “Starlink Service Availability Map,” https://www.starlink.com
/map, 2024
[7] Pan, Jianping, Jinwei Zhao, and Lin Cai. ”Measuring a low-earth-orbit
satellite network.” 2023 IEEE 34th Annual International Symposium on
Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC), 2023.
[8] Zhang, Linkang, et al. ”SeeStar: An Efficient Starlink Asset Detection
Framework.” International Conference on Science of Cyber Security.
Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland, 2023
[9] Secrss. ”ZoomEye Starlink Scan Report,” https://www.secrss.com/artic
les/44419, 2022.
[10] Censys. ”Censys: The Leading Internet Intelligence Platform,” https:
//censys.com/, 2024.
[11] Pan, Jianping, Jinwei Zhao, and Lin Cai. ”Measuring the Satellite Links
of a LEO Network.” IEEE International Conference on Communications
2024. 2024.
[12] Izhikevich, Liz, Manda Tran, Katherine Izhikevich, Gautam Akiwate,
and Zakir Durumeric. ”Democratizing LEO Satellite Network Measurement.” Proceedings of the ACM on Measurement and Analysis of
Computing Systems 8, no. 1 (2024): 1-26.

[13] Izhikevich, Liz, et al. ”A Global Perspective on the Past, Present, and
Future of Video Streaming over Starlink.” Proceedings of the ACM on
Measurement and Analysis of Computing Systems 8.3 (2024): 1-22.
[14] Mohan, Nitinder, et al. ”A multifaceted look at starlink performance.”
Proceedings of the ACM on Web Conference 2024. 2024.
[15] Ferguson, Andrew E., et al. ”Starlink Performance from Different
Perspectives.” Proceedings of the 30th Annual International Conference
on Mobile Computing and Networking. 2024.
[16] Ma, Sami, et al. ”Network characteristics of leo satellite constellations:
A starlink-based measurement from end users.” IEEE INFOCOM 2023IEEE Conference on Computer Communications. IEEE, 2023.
[17] Laniewski, Dominic, et al. ”Wetlinks: a large-scale longitudinal starlink
dataset with contiguous weather data.” arXiv preprint (2024).
[18] Kareem, Karwan Mustafa. ”Cyber Threat Landscape Analysis for Starlink Assessing Risks and Mitigation Strategies in the Global Satellite
Internet Infrastructure.” arXiv, 2024.
[19] Tieby, Nasser, Joseph Khoury, and Elias Bou-Harb. ”Characterizing and
analyzing leo satellite cyber landscape: A starlink case study.” In IEEE
International Conference on Communications, 2024.
[20] Yu, Lingjing, et al. ”A Comprehensive Analysis of Security Vulnerabilities and Attacks in Satellite Modems.” Proceedings of ACM SIGSAC
Conference on Computer and Communications Security. 2024.
[21] Stock, Gregory, et al. ”A Stability-first Approach to Running TCP
over Starlink.” 2024 IEEE International Conference on Communications
Workshops (ICC Workshops). IEEE, 2024.
[22] Jiang, Li, et al. ”LEOTP: An Information-Centric Transport Layer
Protocol for LEO Satellite Networks.” 2023 IEEE 43rd International
Conference on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS). IEEE, 2023.
[23] Reddit, “Reddit Starlink User Community,” https://www.reddit.com/r/S
tarlink/, 2024
[24] Facebook, “Facebook Starlink User Community,” https://www.facebook
.com/groups/spacexstarlink/, 2024
[25] Starlink, “Starlinkforum,” https://starlinkforum.net/, 2024
[26] Wikipedia, “Traceroute,” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Traceroute, 2024
[27] The US FCC, “Satellite Communications Servic,” https://docs.fcc.gov/p
ublic/attachments/DOC-390517A1.pdf, 2023
[28] Starlinkspot, “Starlink-ground-station-locations,” https://starlinkspot.c
om/starlink-ground-station-locations/, 2024
[29] Routeviews, “Routeview,” https://routeview.visivi.com/, 2024
[30] Thyme, “BGP Routing Table,” https://thyme.apnic.net/, 2024
[31] IPinfo, “IP Address Data,” https://ipinfo.io/, 2024
[32] Nmap, “Nmap: the Network Mapper,” https://nmap.org/, 2024
[33] INC, “Google Cloud has signed a deal with SpaceX to connect its
Starlink internet connectivity,” https://theincmagazine.com/google-cl
oud-has-signed-a-deal-with-spacex-to-connect-its-starlink-internet-con
nectivity/, 2023
[34] Peeringdb, “SpaceX Starlink Internet Peering,” https://www.peeringdb.
com/net/18747, 2024
[35] RFC8805, “A Format for Self-Published IP Geolocation Feeds,” https:
//datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8805, 2020
[36] Expressvpn, “How to use starlink-vpn,” https://www.expressvpn.com/b
log/starlink-vpn/, 2024
[37] Kenneally, Erin, and David Dittrich. ”The menlo report: Ethical principles guiding information and communication technology research.”
Available at SSRN 2445102, 2012.
[38] Wan, Gerry, et al. ”On the origin of scanning: The impact of location
on internet-wide scans.” Proceedings of the ACM Internet Measurement
Conference. 2020.
[39] HERRICANE ELECTRIC. ”AS14593 Space Exploration Technologies
Corporation. ” https://bgp.he.net/AS14593# traceroute. 2024.
[40] RIPE. ”RIPE Atlas. ” https://atlas.ripe.net/. 2024.
[41] Durumeric, Zakir, et al. ”Ten years of zmap.” Proceedings of the 2024
ACM on Internet Measurement Conference. 2024.
[42] Wikipedia. ”Tier 1 network.” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tier 1 net
work. 2024.
[43] Yu, Lingjing, et al. ”A Comprehensive Analysis of Security Vulnerabilities and Attacks in Satellite Modems.” Proceedings of ACM SIGSAC
Conference on Computer and Communications Security. 2024.
[44] Wikipedia. ”Multiprotocol Label Switching.” https://en.wikipedia.org/w
iki/Multiprotocol Label Switching. 2024.
[45] Zu, Shuodi, et al. ”City-level IP geolocation algorithm based on PoP
network topology.” IEEE Access 6 (2018): 64867-64875.
[46] Wikipedia. ”WHOIS.” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WHOIS. 2024.
[47] Shodan. ”Shodan Search Engine.” https://www.shodan.io/. 2024.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 20:00:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

