IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 42, NO. 5, MAY 2024

1279

Spatial–Temporal Resource Optimization for
Uneven-Traffic LEO Satellite Systems: Beam
Pattern Selection and User Scheduling
Lei Lei , Member, IEEE, Anyue Wang, Student Member, IEEE, Eva Lagunas , Senior Member, IEEE,
Xin Hu , Senior Member, IEEE, Zhengquan Zhang , Member, IEEE, Zhiqiang Wei , Member, IEEE,
and Symeon Chatzinotas , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract— With the commercial deployment of low earth
orbit (LEO) satellites, the future integrated 6G-satellite system
represents an excellent solution for ubiquitous connectivity and
high-throughput data service to massive users. Due to the
heterogeneity of users’ traffic profiles, uneven traffic distribution among beams or users often occurs in LEO satellite
systems. Conventional satellite payloads with fixed beam radiation patterns may result in large gaps between requested and
allocated capacity. The advances of flexible satellite payloads
with dynamic beamforming capabilities enable spot beams to
adjust their coverage and adaptively schedule users, thus offering
spatial-temporal domain flexibility. Motivated by this, as an
early attempt, we investigate how adaptive beam patterns with
flexible user scheduling schemes can help alleviate mismatches of
requested-transmitted data in uneven-traffic and full-frequency
reuse LEO systems. We formulate an optimization problem to
Manuscript received 18 August 2023; revised 15 November 2023;
accepted 16 December 2023. Date of publication 1 April 2024; date of
current version 9 May 2024. This work was supported in part by the Open
Research Fund of National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory
of Southeast University under Grant 2023D02, in part by the National
Key Laboratory Foundation under Grant 2023-JCJQ-LB-007, in part by the
Qin Chuangyuan Innovation and Talent Project under Grant QCYRCXM2023-049, in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(NSFC) Project under Grant 61871334 and Grant U2268201, in part by
Luxembourg National Research Fund (FNR) MegaLEO Project under Grant
C20/IS/14767486, in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Sichuan
Province under Grant 2023NSFSC0455, in part by the Major Key Project
of Peng Cheng Laboratory under Grant PCL2023AS1-2, and in part
by the Key Research and Development Program of Shaanxi under
Grant 2024GX-YBXM-065. An earlier version of this paper was presented in part at the IEEE Globecom, December 2022. [DOI]: 10.1109/
GLOBECOM48099.2022.10000986. (Corresponding author: Zhiqiang Wei.)
Lei Lei is with the School of Information and Communications Engineering,
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China, and also with the National
Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Southeast University, Nanjing
210096, China (e-mail: lei.lei@xjtu.edu.cn).
Anyue Wang, Eva Lagunas, and Symeon Chatzinotas are with the Interdisciplinary Center for Security, Reliability and Trust, University of Luxembourg,
1855 Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg (e-mail: moonwong.way@gmail.com;
eva.lagunas@uni.lu; symeon.chatzinotas@uni.lu).
Xin Hu is with the School of Electronic Engineering, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China (e-mail:
huxin2016@bupt.edu.cn).
Zhengquan Zhang is with the School of Information Science and Technology, Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu 610032, China.
Zhiqiang Wei is with the School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an
Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China, also with the Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518055, China, and also with the Pazhou
Laboratory (Huangpu), Guangzhou, Guangdong 510555, China (e-mail:
zhiqiang.wei@xjtu.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/JSAC.2024.3383445.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSAC.2024.3383445

jointly determine beam patterns, power allocation, user-LEO
association, and user-slot scheduling. The problem is identified as
mixed-integer nonconvex programming. We propose an efficient
iterative algorithm to solve the problem by first determining
beam patterns and user associations at the frame scale, followed
by optimizing power allocation and user scheduling at the timeslot scale. The four-decision components are iteratively updated to
improve the overall performance. Numerical results demonstrate
the benefits brought by adaptive beam patterns and their
effectiveness in reducing the mismatch effect in uneven-traffic
LEO systems.
Index Terms— Low earth orbit (LEO) satellite, uneven traffic,
adaptive beam radiation patterns, resource optimization.

I. I NTRODUCTION
OW earth orbit (LEO) satellite systems are envisioned
as one of the promising solutions to the upcoming
beyond 5G (B5G) and 6G era for the potentials of offering
high-throughput transmission and extending communications
to remote or unserved areas [1]. Compared to geostationary
earth orbit (GEO) and medium earth orbit (MEO) satellites,
LEO satellites operate at lower altitudes with low latency
and transmission attenuation [2]. To address exponentially
growing traffic demand and support ubiquitous connectivity
in the future, the industry is motivated to develop projects on
building advanced architectures with hundreds or thousands of
LEO satellites in space [3].
The dense deployment of LEO satellites may introduce
more interference. users, especially those located in the areas
overlapped by neighboring satellites’ beam coverages, may
receive considerable co-channel interference, which could
result in severe performance degradation [4], [5]. Another typical concern is raised by the heterogeneity of traffic distribution
that often varies temporally and geographically. To improve
the utilization of scarce spectrum, resource allocation in LEO
satellite systems shall be adapted to the dynamic variations
of on-ground traffic demand [6]. The coordination of multiple
LEO satellites to provide high-quality services to ground users
is crucial and challenging, which calls for the introduction of
more flexibility in radio resource allocation.
In conventional satellite systems, beam radiation patterns
are decided before launch and the projected beam shapes (or
footprints) are fixed during service [7]. As the deployment of
LEO satellites becomes dense, the fixed footprint plan cannot

L

0733-8716 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:58:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1280

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 42, NO. 5, MAY 2024

Fig. 1. Illustrative examples of adjusting beam patterns for better coverage
and efficient transmission. Reducing coverage areas from (a) to (b) to avoid
overlap and mitigate co-channel interference; Enlarging coverage areas from
(c) to (d) to connect more users.

adapt to dynamic variations and uneven traffic distribution,
which limits the performance. With the advances of flexible payloads with onboard digital processing, beam shapes
can be dynamically altered by changing beam patterns via
beamforming networks (BFN) instead of mechanically moving
antennas [7], [8], [9]. By adjusting the selection of different
beam patterns, data transmission in satellite systems can be
more adaptive to non-uniform traffic distribution and with
mitigated co-channel interference [10], [12], [14]. Besides, the
capability of integrating to terrestrial systems or non-terrestrial
networks (NTN) can be improved by adapting footprints to
reduce co-channel interference to terrestrial systems [16] or to
satisfy configuration requirements in various systems [17]. The
authors in [18] developed a multi-objective deep reinforcement
learning approach for dynamic beam hopping to reduce the gap
of offered-allocated capacity. Illustrative instances of adaptive
beam patterns are shown in Fig. 1. When a user is located
in the area covered by two adjacent satellite beams (full
frequency reuse), e.g., in Fig. 1(a), it may suffer from large
inter-satellite interference. To reduce the interference, both
satellites could select beam patterns with smaller coverage
to avoid overlap, as depicted in Fig. 1(b). Another typical
example is to change patterns with wider radiated beams to
cover more users that are beyond but near the beam edge,
as presented in the process from Fig. 1(c) to Fig. 1(d).
A. Related Works
Considering extra flexibility in spatial domain and advantages of traffic adaptation and interference mitigation, the
design of adaptive beam pattern schemes has received growing
attention. In [16], the authors studied adaptive beam control
schemes in LEO satellite systems to maximize the signalto-noise ratio and minimize the interference to incumbent
terrestrial systems. The authors in [10] jointly optimized

beam size and transmit power to improve the adaptation to
varying traffic. Particularly, the coupling between beamwidth
and power was discussed. In [11], the authors designed flexible schemes to tackle several issues for satellite systems,
including beam localization, beamwidth adjustment, use-beam
scheduling, and beam coloring. Besides beam size, more
factors affecting beam shapes, e.g., beam center and rotation
angle, were taken into account, and novel footprint planning
strategies were designed to match offered capacity to irregular
traffic distribution in [12]. Further, the authors in [13] provide
a more comprehensive view on beam radiation pattern design,
considering factors like beamwidth, beam center, required
effective isotropic radiated power, side lobe levels, and nulling
direction. In the above works, regular beam shapes (e.g.,
circular or elliptical) were employed. However, the expressions of transmit antenna gain w.r.t. configuration parameters
(including beamwidth, beam center, rotation angle, etc.) are
generally sophisticated [12]. Directly defining the optimal
beam pattern is difficult and cumbersome, even when we
consider regular beam shapes. These approaches may also be
inapplicable to more general scenarios where irregular beam
shapes are adopted [7]. Regarding irregular shaped beams,
the authors in [15], provided a generic radiation model and
designed a dynamic beamforming optimization framework to
adjust offered capacity to match irregular traffic demands.
Unlike the above works that directly optimize beam radiation patterns, multiple candidate beam patterns can be
pre-designed and the corresponding parameter settings can
be stored in advance for various potential scenarios [19].
During service, suitable beam patterns can be selected from
the candidate set depending on traffic distribution and interference levels. Unlike directly optimizing beam patterns, the
optimization of beam pattern selection can be applied to any
type of footprint. Additionally, the update of candidate beam
patterns can be processed ahead of transmission rather than
real-time adjustment, which is more extendable to practical
implementation. In [14], the authors optimized beam pattern
selection to minimize the capacity-demand gap, normalized
coverage error, and cost per Gbps in orbits and discussed the
implementation of adaptive beam patterns in practical satellite
payloads.
B. Motivations and Contributions
The abovementioned works focused on optimizing beam
patterns from the beam level, i.e., satisfying irregular traffic
distribution across different areas rather than capacity-demand
matching for specific users. The mutual influence between
adaptive beam patterns and resource allocation (e.g., power
allocation and user association/scheduling) has not been fully
discussed. For instance, when the beam pattern plan is aggressive with large footprints, more users can be covered by
the footprint. However, the co-channel interference, especially
for users in the overlapped areas, becomes larger, leading to
difficulties in resource allocation. On the contrary, the effect
of interference is eased to some extent when narrow beams
are employed, and thus a more flexible scheduling plan can

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:58:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEI et al.: SPATIAL–TEMPORAL RESOURCE OPTIMIZATION FOR UNEVEN-TRAFFIC LEO SATELLITE SYSTEMS

be applied. Not all the users are covered by their associated
beams and thus low data rate may happen to those edge users.
In this case, the performance of resource allocation would be
limited by inappropriate beam pattern selection.
As an early-attempt study in [20], we evaluate the performance gain of adopting adaptive beam pattern in LEO satellite
systems under pre-decided user scheduling. For extension,
we are motivated to provide more comprehensive insights
on joint resource optimization of beam pattern selection and
resource allocation and aim to analyze their mutual influence, which distinguish this work from other state-of-the-art
works [10], [12], [14], [15]. The main contributions are
summarized as follows:
• To investigate the coupling between beam pattern selection and resource allocation in LEO satellite systems,
we formulate a joint optimization problem of beam
pattern selection, power allocation, user-LEO association,
and user-slot scheduling. The objective is to minimize the
capacity-demand gap such that the delivered data can be
matched to users’ uneven traffic demands.
• We provide insights on determining beam patterns and
user association via thoroughly analyzing a special case.
That is, satellites tend to serve high-demand users and
select narrow beams, more concentrated on associated
users and radiating less interference to other users.
• We propose an efficient scheme to jointly optimize power
allocation and user scheduling on a timeslot-by-timeslot
basis.
• We design a swap-based approach to update pattern
selection and user association such that the performance
can be iteratively improved.
• Numerical results demonstrate the advantages of adaptive
beam patterns over conventional single-pattern schemes.
The results validate the performance of the proposed
scheme in terms of complexity, capacity-demand matching, power consumption, and user association over
benchmarks.
The remainders of the paper are organized as follows:
Section II elaborates the considered LEO satellite systems with
the functionality of adaptive beam patterns. In Section III,
we formulate a joint optimization problem of power allocation, beam pattern selection, and user association/scheduling.
In Section IV, we analyze the optimization of beam pattern
selection and user association. An efficient approach of jointly
optimizing power allocation and user scheduling is provided
in Section V. In this section, we also present a swap-based
approach to further improve the performance. Numerical
results are presented and analyzed in Section VI. Section VII
concludes the paper.
II. S YSTEM M ODEL
Consider downlink data transmission in a LEO satellite
system, as depicted in Fig. 2. S LEO satellites fly over the
area of interest, where each satellite beam’s coverage may
be partially overlapping with neighboring beams. Denote S
as the set of the satellites and K as the set of the users.

1281

Fig. 2. An illustrative scenario of the considered LEO satellite system where
adaptive beam patterns are adopted.

We assume that each LEO satellite generates one beam [5],
[16], [17]. In the system, all the LEO satellites fully reuse
the same frequency band. The communication procedure is
described as follows: First, messages containing users’ status,
e.g., channel conditions, traffic demand, users’ positions, etc.,
are fed back to the gateway via return links. Based on the
information, the resource manager co-located with the gateway executes the resource optimization algorithm to generate
optimized decisions, including beam pattern selection, user
association/scheduling, and power allocation. Note that beam
configurations can be communicated through the TT&C link
in practice which can be separate from the feeder link. Next,
the gateway informs the decisions to satellites and delivers
data from the core networks to satellites. At last, satellites
generate beams according to the selected patterns and transmit
data to targeted users. Remark that the latency among different
transmission links is assumed to be identical.
Denote Ns as the set of the candidate beam patterns of
satellite s. Each pattern corresponds to one specific beam
shape. With optimized decisions informed by the gateway, one
beam pattern is selected from Ns . The information of resource
allocation is carried before the data frame is transmitted.
In practical satellite systems, the communication distances
between satellites and ground terminals are large and the
latency may not be ignored. We consider that beam patterns
and user association change on a frame-by-frame basis and
resource allocation is targeted for one frame. Denote T as
the set of the T timeslots in one frame. The beam pattern is
generated by the BFN on the satellite payload, as depicted
in Fig. 3. By BFN controlling phase shifters and variable
power dividers to alter phases and amplitudes, respectively,
each feed element generates one elementary beam and the
shaped beam is constructed by these elementary beams [7].
The resulted beam shape is defined as the coverage within the
φ-dB contour [7].
The relationship between the transmit antenna gain of a
beam pattern and the corresponding configuration parameters
is sophisticated and might not be captured by explicit expressions, especially for patterns with irregular beam shapes [7],
[12], [14]. For illustration, we plot the 3dB curve to produce

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:58:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1282

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 42, NO. 5, MAY 2024

with beam pattern n is expressed as,
Rx
total
|hskn |2 = GTx
skn Gk /Lsk ,

(6)

where GRx
k is the receive antenna gain of user k. The channel
gain from satellite s to user k is derived as,
X
ysn |hskn |2 .
|hsk |2 =

(7)

n∈Ns

Fig. 3.

The shaped beam antenna with BFN.

ellipse beams to illustrate the beam pattern model. The transmit antenna gain of satellite s with beam pattern n regarding
user k is expressed by,
2

J3 (usnk )
J1 (usnk )
Tx
,
(1)
+
36
GTx
=
G
snk
sn,max
2usnk
u3snk
where J1 (·) and J3 (·) are Bessel functions of the first kind of
order one and three, respectively. GTx
sn,max is the peak transmit
antenna gain of satellite s with pattern n. The notation usnk
is expressed as,
usnk = 2.07123

sin θsk
,
sin θsn,3dB

(2)

(3)

sc
ra
where Lga
sk , Lsk , and Lsk are gaseous, scintillation, and rain
attenuation exceeded for ρ% of an average year, respectively.
Here, the operator [·] converts values into dB. Lba
sk is the basic
path loss, which is derived as,
sf
[Lba
sk ] = [Lsk ] + [Lsk ],

(4)

where Lsf
sk denotes shadow fading following log-normal distribution. Lsk denotes the free-space path loss, which is
expressed by [20],
Lsk = 32.45 + 20 log10 (f freq ) + 20 log10 (dsk ),

s′ ∈S\{s} n∈Ns′

where Pst is the transmit power of satellite s at timeslot t and
σ 2 is the noise power. The available rate of user k if scheduled
by satellite s at timeslot t is,
Rskt = B log(1 + γskt ),

(9)

where B is bandwidth. The offered capacity (in bps) of user
k is,
XX
Rk =
xskt Rskt ,
(10)
t∈T s∈S

where θsk denotes the off-axis angle between the s-th satellite’s beam center and the k-th user. θsn,3dB denotes the 3-dB
angular beamwidth of pattern n radiated by satellite s. The
beam pattern model in (1) is widely adopted, e.g., a simplified
Bessel function was adopted in 3GPP TR 38.811 [21].
For other types of beam shapes, the expression could be
more complicated, e.g., the transmit antenna gain for elliptical
beams depends on beam center position, beamwidth (including
the major and minor axes), and tilt angle [7], [12]. Remark
that we only focus on beam pattern selection, where the candidate patterns are determined before transmission and can be
updated easily when necessary. Thus the approaches discussed
in this paper can be applied to any types of footprints.
The channel loss from satellite s to user k is written as [21],
ga
ba
sc
ra
[Ltotal
sk ] = [Lsk ] + [Lsk ] + [Lsk ] + [Lsk ],

Here, ysn ∈ {0, 1} indicates beam pattern selection, where
ysn = 1 if satellite s selects the n-th pattern and ysn =
0 otherwise.
If user k associated to satellite s is scheduled at timeslot t, the corresponding signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio
(SINR) is expressed as,
P
ysn |hskn |2 Pst
n∈Ns
P
P
,
(8)
γskt =
ys′ n |hs′ kn |2 Ps′ t + σ 2

(5)

where dsk is the distance from satellite s to user k, and f freq
is the frequency. The channel gain from satellite s to user k

where xskt ∈ {0, 1} indicates whether the user is scheduled
to timeslot t by satellite s (xskt = 1 if scheduled and
0 otherwise).
III. P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
We formulate a resource allocation problem to jointly
optimize power allocation, beam-pattern selection, and user
association and scheduling. The optimization variables are
listed as follows,
Pst ≥ 0, transmit power of satellite s at timeslot t;
(
1, if satellite s serves user k at timeslot t,
xskt =
0, otherwise;
(
1, if satellite s selects the n-th beam pattern,
ysn =
0, otherwise;
(
1, if user k is associated to satellite s,
zsk =
0, otherwise.
The objective is to minimize
P the sum of capacity-demand gap,
which is measured by
k∈K |Rk − Dk |. This dissimilarity
metric has been widely adopted in satellite systems, which
can describe the mismatch effects between offered capacity
and requested traffic. Note that the case Rk = Dk reflects a
perfect capacity-demand match and the gap increases if Rk is
distant from Dk (either larger or smaller). The optimization
problem is formulated as,
X
P0 :
min
|Rk − Dk |
(11a)
Pst ,xskt ,ysn ,zsk

k∈K

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:58:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEI et al.: SPATIAL–TEMPORAL RESOURCE OPTIMIZATION FOR UNEVEN-TRAFFIC LEO SATELLITE SYSTEMS

s.t. Pst ≤ P̄s , ∀s ∈ S, ∀t ∈ T ,
X
zsk ≤ 1, ∀k ∈ K,

1283

(11b)
(11c)

s∈S

X

es,
zsk ≤ K

∀s ∈ S,

(11d)

xskt = 1,

∀s ∈ S, ∀t ∈ T ,

(11e)

k∈K

X
k∈K

xskt ≤ zsk , ∀s ∈ S, ∀k ∈ K, ∀t ∈ T , (11f)
X
ysn = 1, ∀s ∈ S,
(11g)
n∈Ns

Rk ≥ Rkmin

X

zsk ,

∀k ∈ K.

(11h)

s∈S

In (11b), the transmit power of satellites is no larger than the
power budget. In (11c), each user can be associated to at most
e s users can be
one satellite. For the s-th satellite, at most K
associated in (11d). In (11e), each satellite schedules only one
user to each timeslot. The connection between xskt and zsk is
expressed in (11f). If user k is not associated to satellite s, i.e.,
zsk = 0, xskt is restricted to zero; otherwise, xskt ∈ {0, 1}.
Constraints (11g) restrict that each satellite can only select
one pattern. In (11h), the offered capacity of user k should
be at least larger than Rkmin if the user is associated to any
satellite. Usually, the requested traffic demand is larger than
the minimum-rate requirement, i.e., Dk > Rkmin .
We can observe that P0 falls into the category
of mixed-integer nonconvex programming considering the
non-convexity of the objective function and constraints (11h)
(resulted by the non-convex expression of Rskt in (8) and (9))
and the presence of binary variables xskt , ysn , and zsk . It is
a non-trivial task to directly solve P0 . To tackle the problem,
we decompose the original problem into two subproblems:
1) joint optimization of beam pattern selection and user
association; 2) joint optimization of power allocation and user
scheduling.
IV. J OINT O PTIMIZATION OF B EAM PATTERN S ELECTION
AND U SER A SSOCIATION
In this section, we study beam pattern selection and user
association. The joint problem of beam pattern selection and
user association is expressed as,
X
P1 : min
|Rk − Dk |
(12a)
ysn ,zsk

k∈K

s.t. (11c), (11d), (11f), (11g), (11h).

(12b)

Since the binary variables ysn appear in both numerator
and denominator of the SINR expression as shown in (8),
P1 is non-convex integer programming, which is difficult to
solve. We first study the characteristics of P1 by discussing
strategies in some special cases. Based on the analysis,
we design an approach to determine beam patterns and
user association.
A. Discussion of Special Cases
Consider a scenario in Fig. 4 in which multiple LEO
satellites aim to serve an area with heterogeneous traffic

Fig. 4. Illustration of the special-case scenario, where multiple LEO satellites
are flying (from the left to the right) over the targeted area with heterogeneous
traffic distribution. High-demand and low-demand users are colored in red and
blue, respectively. Depending on different traffic distributions within the beam
coverage, satellites adjust their selections of beam patterns and associated
users.

distribution. In the first case, satellites move to the positions
where high-demand users are located near the beam center,
as depicted in Fig. 4(a). Since high-demand users’ performance is more significant to the capacity-demand matching
of the whole system compared to low-demand users, satellites
tend to select beam patterns with smaller but more concentrated shapes, e.g., in Fig. 4(b). In this way, more capacity
is offered to high-demand users and meanwhile co-channel
interference towards other beams is mitigated, such that the
capacity-demand mismatch can be largely reduced.
As satellites move to the right, however, the distances
between satellites and users change. High-demand users stand
beyond the beam coverage much worse channel conditions,
resulting in deteriorated performance even if more resources
are assigned to them. In this case, satellites are prone to expand
their beam coverage to serve more low-demand users but with
better channel conditions to reduce mismatch effects, as shown
in Fig. 4(c).

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:58:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1284

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 42, NO. 5, MAY 2024

From the above special cases, we observe that the decision
of beam pattern selection and user association is influenced
by users’ demand and channel conditions. Based on the above
cases, we discuss how to optimize beam pattern selection and
user association in the following remark.
Remark 1: The optimization of beam pattern selection and
user association is discussed from the following two aspects:
• User association: Given determined beam patterns, the
decisions of association is made by considering both
users’ demand and channel conditions. On the one hand,
users with higher demand are more likely to be served
since they have more influence on the overall capacitydemand gap. On the other hand, satellites tend to choose
users experiencing better channel conditions, i.e., larger
gain from the associated satellite but smaller intersatellite interference.
• Beam pattern selection: With the decision of user association, each satellite selects a beam pattern generating
large channel gains to the associated users but small
co-channel interference to users served by neighboring
satellites.
□
In short, Remark 1 conveys that satellites tend to select
patterns with smaller but concentrated beams to cover the
associated users as well as generate smaller inter-satellite interference and select users for association with higher demand
and better channel conditions.
B. Algorithmic Design
Based on Remark 1, we design an approach to determine
user association and beam pattern selection. Given beam
pattern selection, we calculate the following ratios,



µsk = Dk log 

|h |2

P sk
,
|hs′ k |2

∀k ∈ K, ∀s ∈ S,

s′ ∈S\{s}

(13)
which take into consideration both channel conditions and
traffic demands. By sorting these ratios, each satellite selects
e largest-µsk users for association and update Ks (the set of
K
users associated to satellite s). After deciding user association,
each satellite computes the following ratios,
X
|h |2
P skn
νsn =
, ∀n ∈ Ns , ∀s ∈ S, (14)
|hsk′ n |2
k∈Ks

Algorithm 1 Optimization of Beam Pattern Selection and User
Association
Input: |hskn |2 , Dk . Initialized ysn , zsk .
1: repeat
2:
Calculate µsk in (13), ∀k ∈ K, ∀s ∈ S.
3:
Sort µsk for each satellite.
e largest-µsk users for associa4:
Each satellite selects K
tion.
5:
Update zsk and Ks .
6:
Computes νsn in (14), ∀n ∈ Ns , ∀s ∈ S.
7:
Each satellite selects the pattern with the largest νsn .
8:
Update ysn .
9: until ysn and zsk converge or reaching I1 iterations
Output: Optimized ysn , zsk .

value of νsn are O(K log(K)) and O(N ), respectively [22].
Thus the overall complexity is derived as O(I1 S(K log(K) +
N )).
V. J OINT O PTIMIZATION OF P OWER A LLOCATION AND
U SER S CHEDULING
In this section, we jointly optimize power allocation and
user scheduling given decided beam pattern selection and user
association, which is expressed as,
X
P2 : min
|Rk − Dk |
(15a)
Pst ,xskt

A. Problem Transformation
Solving P2 is complicated. Considering the applicability of
the solution to practical implementation, we break the coupling
across timeslots in P2 and decompose the problem into T
subproblems, each of which corresponds to a timeslot. The
subproblem at timeslot t is written as,
P2 (t) : min

Pst ,xskt

X X

xskt Rskt + R̄kt − Dk

k∈K s∈S

#+

"
+ρ

k∈Ks′ ,s′ ̸=s

for each beam pattern and selects the pattern with the largest
νsn , i.e., largest gain from satellite s but smallest interference
to users associated to s′ ̸= s.
The whole procedure is summarized in Alg. 1, where user
association is decided in line 2 to line 5 and beam pattern
selection is proceeded in line 6 to line 8. The algorithm
terminates if the iteration number exceeds I1 or the solution
stays unchanged.
The complexity of Alg. 1 falls in the sorting process in line 3
and the arg-max process in line 7. The complexity of sorting
K users based on µsk and choosing the pattern with the largest

k∈K

s.t. (11b), (11e), (11h).
(15b)
P
Note that only scheduled users with
s∈S zsk = 1 are
considered and hence contraints (11f) are omitted in P2 . The
problem is still in the format of mixed-integer nonconvex
programming.

X

Rkmin −

k∈K

X

xskt Rskt − R̄kt

(16a)

s∈S

s.t. Pst ≤ P̄s , ∀s ∈ S,
X
xskt = 1, ∀s ∈ S.

(16b)
(16c)

k∈K

Here, we define R̄kt as the rate already allocated to the user
before the t-th timeslot, which is expressed as,
R̄kt =

t−1 X
X

xskτ Rskτ ,

(17)

τ =0 s∈S

where Rsk0 = 0, ∀s ∈ S, ∀k ∈ K. We move constraints (11h)
to the objective as a penalty with the factor ρ > 0. The operator

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:58:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEI et al.: SPATIAL–TEMPORAL RESOURCE OPTIMIZATION FOR UNEVEN-TRAFFIC LEO SATELLITE SYSTEMS

[·]+ is equivalent to max{·, 0}. The objective is penalized if
constraints (11h) are violated.
We convert P2 (t) into the following problem where the
absolute operation in the objective is removed,
!
X
X
′
P2 (t) : min
Dk −
xskt Rskt − R̄kt
Pst ,xskt

#+

"
+ρ

We derive an iterative approach to solve P2′′ (t). Given xskt
and Pst , we update γs and ηs by,
|hsks |2 Pst
,
2
2
′
′
s′ ∈S\{s} |hs ks | Ps t + σ
p
B (1 + γs )|hsks |2 Pst
,
ηs = P
2
2
′
′
s′ ∈S |hs ks | Ps t + σ

γs = P

s∈S

k∈K

X

Rkmin −

X

xskt Rskt − R̄kt

(18a)

s∈S

k∈K

s.t. (16b), (16c),
X
xskt Rskt + R̄kt ≤ Dk ,

∀k ∈ K.

(18b)

s∈S

The equivalence between P2 (t) and P2′ (t) is built based on
the following proposition, which conveys that if the resource
is sufficient, the optimal allocated rates of the scheduled users
are no larger than their demands.
Proposition
1: At the optimum of P2 (t), the allocated rates
P
meet
Proof:
s∈S xskt Rskt + R̄kt ≤ Dk , ∀k ∈ K.
Please kindly refer to Appendix A.
□

(22)

s∈S

i+
Xh
esk t − R̄k t .
Rkmin
−
R
s
s
s

(23)

s∈S

B. Algorithmic Design
To solve P2′ (t) with combinatorial and nonconvex properties, one of the widely-adopted ideas is to convert the problem
into a series of convex subproblems, where the solution can
be obtained by iteratively solving these subproblems. Conventional approaches, e.g., successive convex approximation
(SCA) method and Dinkelbach’s transform method, can be
applied. However, since a convex problem needs to be solved
at each iteration, these approaches may end up with large
computational complexity in practice. We design an iterative
approach based on quadratic transform method [23] with lower
complexity. One benefit of quadratic transform method is that
the log-fractional rate functions can be converted into convex
quadratic expressions and the series of convex subproblems
can be optimized by deriving closed-formed update rules such
that the overall complexity can be largely reduced.
We introduce auxiliary variables γs ≥ 0 and ηs ≥ 0 and
transform the rate functions in (9) as the following,
p
eskt = B log(1 + γs ) − Bγs + 2ηs B(1 + γs )|hsk |2 Pst
R
X
− ηs2
|hs′ k |2 Ps′ t − ηs2 σ 2 . (19)
s′ ∈S

eskt into P ′ (t), the problem is then transBy substituting R
2
formed into the following,
!
X
X
′′
e
P2 (t) :
min
Dk −
xskt Rskt − R̄kt
k∈K

s∈S

#+

"
+ρ

(21)

where ks denotes the index of the user scheduled by satellite
s.
With fixed xskt , γs , and ηs , the residual power allocation
is convex without (18b), since the nonconvex rate functions
have been converted to convex quadratic expressions. Thus,
while the update iterates, we temporally ignore (18b). Power
allocation will be adjusted to meet (18b) after the iterations.
Note that only the S scheduled user
P with xeskt = 1e are
considered at this phase and thus
s∈S xskt Rskt = Rsks t
in this case. The corresponding Lagrangian dual function is
derived as,
X
esk t − R̄k t )
L(Pst ) =
(Dks − R
s
s
+ρ

Pst ,xskt ,γs ,ηs

1285

X
k∈K

Rkmin −

X

The KKT conditions are,
s
B(1 + γs )|hsks |2
∂L
= (1 + ψs )ηs
∂Pst
Pst
X
2
−
(1 + ψs′ )ηs′ |hsks′ |2 = 0,

(24)

where
(
ψs =

ek t + R̄k t < Rmin ;
ρ, if R
ks
s
s
ek t + R̄k t ≥ Rkmin .
0, if R
s
s
s

(25)

Then the optimal power allocation is derived by,
)
(
(1 + ψs )2 (ηs )2 B(1 + γs )|hsks |2
∗
Pst = min
2 , P̄s . (26)
P
2
′ )η ′ |hsk ′ |2
(1
+
ψ
′
s
s
s ∈S
s
The total number of potential combinations for deciding all ψs
is 2S . To maintain the computational complexity at an acceptable level, a heuristic decision strategy is applied. We first let
ekt . Then set
ψs = 1 for all satellites and calculate Pst and R
ψs = ρ to increase the power value (let Pst = P̄st when Ps
ek t + R̄k t < Rmin .
surpasses the budget) if R
s
s
ks
eskt
As the power allocation is decided, we can calculate R
for each user. The residual user scheduling problem is a linear
integer programming, which can be further divided into each
satellite as,

X 
eskt − R̄kt
P3′′ (t, s) : min
Dk − xskt R
xskt

eskt − R̄kt
xskt R

k∈Ks

+ρ

s∈S

X h

eskt − R̄kt
Rkmin − xskt R

i+

(27a)

k∈Ks

(20a)
s.t. (16b), (16c), (18b).

∀s ∈ S,

s′ ∈S

(20b)

s.t.

X

xskt = 1,

(27b)

k∈K

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:58:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1286

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 42, NO. 5, MAY 2024

Algorithm 2 Joint Optimization of Power Allocation and User
Scheduling
Input: ysn , zsk , ρ, Dk , Ks , and channel gains; Initialized Pst
and xskt .
1: for t = 1, . . . , T do
2:
Initialize γs and ηs , ∀s ∈ S.
3:
repeat
4:
Update γs and ηs in (21) and (22), respectively.
5:
Compute Pst in (26) by letting ψs = 1, ∀s ∈ S.
6:
Adjust Pst in (26) with ψs = ρ for satellites with
ekt + R̄kt < Rmin .
R
k
7:
Update xskt based on the rule in (28).
8:
until Convergence or reaching I2 iterations
9:
if there exist users with Rkt + R̄kt > Dk then
10:
Set Rks t + R̄ks t = Dks for these users and adjust
Pst by solving equations in (29).
11:
end if
12:
Update Ks and calculate R̄kt .
13: end for
Output: Optimized Pst and xskt .

Algorithm 3 Joint Optimization of Adaptive Beam Patterns
and Resource Allocation
Input: Dk and channel gains; Initialized F ∗ = inf as the
∗
∗
∗
best objective value, x∗skt , ysn
, zsk
, and Pst
as the best
solution.
1: Determine beam pattern selection and user association by
∗
∗
Alg. 1 and update ysn
and zsk
.
2: repeat
sk
3:
Randomly select swaps Φsn
sn′ and Ψsk′ , where ysn and
zsk are the solution after this swap.
4:
Optimize power allocation and user scheduling by Alg.
2 based on ysn and zsk . Obtain xskt , Pst , and the
corresponding objective value F.
5:
if F < F ∗ then
6:
Operate the swaps.
∗
∗
∗
7:
Update x∗skt = xskt , ysn
= ysn , zsk
= zsk , Pst
=
∗
Pst , and F = F.
8:
end if
9: until Reaching I3 iterations
∗
∗
∗
.
, and Pst
, zsk
Output: x∗skt , ysn

where Ks is the set containing the users associated to satellite s
but excluding users already satisfied with demands. With (27b)
that each satellite can only schedule one user to each timeslot,
we can derive the following rule to select the optimal user for
the s-th satellite,
h
i+
eskt − R̄kt + ρ Rkmin − R
eskt − R̄kt .
ks∗ = arg min Dk − R

C. The Algorithm Framework

k∈Ks

(28)
Then we set xsks∗ t = 1 accordingly.
After iterations, we need to adjust the power allocation to
meet constraints (18b). Let S̄ be the set of the satellites whose
scheduled users’ rates are larger than their demands, i.e.,
Rks t + R̄ks t > Dks . We set Rks t = Dks − R̄ks t , ∀s ∈ S̄, and
convert the corresponding rate expressions into the following,
 R
P
2
2
′
′
ks t
s′ ∈S\{s} |hs ks | Ps t + σ
B
Pst = 2
−1
, ∀s ∈ S,
|hsks |2
(29)
which can be viewed as the equations of Pst . By solving the
equations, the power allocation for those users can be adjusted
to Rks t + R̄ks t = Dks . After that, we need to remove users
with satisfied demands from Ks .
The whole procedure of jointly optimizing power allocation
and user scheduling is summarized in Alg. 2. The algorithm
is operated timeslot by timeslot. In each timeslot, iterations
are performed to update γs , ηs , Pst , and xskt from line 4
to line 7, and terminate when convergence occurs or the
maximum number of iterations I2 is reached. Within each
iteration, the update of xskt (computing the values in (28)
and selecting the user with the minimum for each satellite)
e In line 10, power
dominates the complexity with O(S K).
allocation is adjusted to meet Rk ≤ Dk , where the complexity
of solving the equations in (29) is O(S 3 ) [24] in the worst
e + S 3 )).
case. Thus, the complexity of Alg. 2 is O(T (I2 S K

To solve P0 , Alg. 1 is performed first to decide
beam patterns and user association at the frame level
and then Alg. 2 is executed to jointly optimize power
allocation and user scheduling at the timeslot level.
To futher improve the performance, we design a swap-based
algorithm to update the selection of beam patterns
and users to iteratively decrease the capacity-demand
gap.
Beam pattern selection and user association can be
defined as two many-to-one matching problems. A swap of
satellite-pattern matching is defined as Φsn
sn′ , denoting that
satellite s changes pattern selection from n to n′ . In other
words, the integer solution changes from {ysn = 1, ysn′ = 0}
to {ysn = 0, ysn′ = 1}. Similarly, we define a swap of
satellite-user matching as Ψsk
sk′ , which means the satellite
changes the scheduling from user k to user k ′ . Accordingly,
the integer solution of {zsk = 1, zsk′ = 0} is changed to
sk
{zsk = 0, zsk′ = 1}. The swaps Φsn
sn′ and Ψsk′ are operated
if:
′
′
• F > F , where F and F are the objective values before
and after the swaps, respectively.
The detailed procedure of the overall scheme is summarized
in Alg. 3. In line 1, beam pattern selection and user association
are initialized by Alg. 1. From line 2 to line 9, the update
operation is executed for I3 iterations. Within each iteration,
we first randomly select swaps in line 3 and calculate the
objective value based on the satellite-pattern and satellite-user
matchings after the swaps by optimizing power allocation
and user scheduling via Alg. 2 in line 4. In line 5 to
line 8, we operate the swaps and update the best solution and
objective value if the capacity-demand gap decreases after the
swaps. The complexity of each iteration mainly comes from
executing Alg. 1. Thus the overall complexity of Alg. 3 is
e + S 3 )).
O(I3 T (I2 S K

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:58:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEI et al.: SPATIAL–TEMPORAL RESOURCE OPTIMIZATION FOR UNEVEN-TRAFFIC LEO SATELLITE SYSTEMS

1287

TABLE I
S IMULATION PARAMETERS

Fig. 6. Gap performance of the proposed schemes (with different I3 ) and
the SCA-based approach versus the number of users K (average demand is
set to be 200 Mbps).

Fig. 5. Average computational time consumed by the proposed approaches
(with different I3 ) and the SCA-based approach.

For practical implementation, the algorithm can be divided
into two parts. With less flexibility compared to power allocation and user scheduling, the optimization of user association
and beam pattern selection can be solved ahead of service
with predicted channel models and demands for a long-term
goal of diminishing capacity-demand gap. During each frame,
dynamic issues may happen. In this case, user scheduling and
power allocation can be optimized in a short-term way to adapt
to short-term changes.
VI. N UMERICAL R ESULTS
In simulation, we consider a square area with 200×200 km2 ,
where the generation of users follows two-dimension normal
distributions [25]. The main parameters are summarized in
Table I, unless otherwise stated. The generation of beam
radiation patterns follows the rule in [7] and [10] where
GTx
sn,max depends on the beamwidth. We consider beam patterns which generate circular beams with 3-dB beamwidths
{1◦ , 1.5◦ , 2◦ , 2.5◦ , 3◦ } [7]. Beams with 1◦ beamwidth have
the largest directivity to the beam center whereas those with
3◦ beamwidth generate the widest service range. The results
are averaged over 500 instances.
We first evaluate the performance of the proposed approach
in the aspects of consumed computational time in Fig. 5. For
comparison, a benchmark based on the conventional convex-

ification (SCA) method is set, where the power optimization
problem is addressed by solving a series of approximated
convex subproblems and the integer solution is obtained by
Alg. 3 with I3 = 50. We can observe that the proposed
approach can maintain the computational time at the level
of milliseconds when K ≤ 15. This is because resources
are enough to satisfy users’ demand when the number of
users is small such that the algorithm can perform an early
stop. As the problem size increases with the number of users
(K ≥ 20), the consumed computational time of the proposed
approach remains a relatively smooth variation compared to
the SCA-based approach. When I3 = 1, the computational
time stays below 1 second since no update of integer solutions
is executed. The SCA-based approach requires more computational time with a drastic rise. As described in Alg. 2,
we jointly optimize power allocation and user scheduling by
a series of closed-form expressions rather than solving convex
subproblems, which saves up computational efforts compared
to the conventional SCA-based scheme.
In Fig. 6, we present the capacity-demand gap performance
of the proposed and SCA-based schemes. As abovementioned,
users’ capacity matches to their requested demand when K ≤
15. After that, the capacity-demand gap grows with K linearly.
With swap-based update of beam pattern selection and user
association, the proposed scheme with I3 = 20 can alleviate
the mismatch by 39.81% over that with I3 = 1. As the number
of iterations I3 increases, the proposed scheme reduces the
capacity-demand gap through searching more possible integer
solutions but tends to converge. From I3 = 20 to 50, the proposed approach decreases the gap by 12.40%. The reduction is
6.95% when I3 rises from 50 to 100. Compared to the SCAbased approach, the proposed approach only sacrifices 4.11%
performance but largely reduces the computational efforts as
presented in Fig. 5, which demonstrates a better complexityperformance tradeoff.
Then we compare the proposed scheme with some state-ofthe-art strategies in Fig. 7. We set the following strategies as
benchmarks:

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:58:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1288

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 42, NO. 5, MAY 2024

Fig. 7.
Gap performance of the proposed scheme and state-of-the-art
strategies, where K = 20.

Fig. 8. Gap performance of the schemes with different beam pattern settings,
where K = 20.

e users for association
Random: Each satellite selects K
randomly and then chooses the beam pattern with the
largest νsn . At each timeslot, users are scheduled following the Round-Robin basis [26].
• Best-channel: users are associated to satellites with the
best channel gains and beam patterns with the largest νsn
are selected. During the scheduling period, each satellite
serves best-channel users first until Rk ≥ Dk [4], [27].
• Largest-demand: Each satellite chooses users with the
largest demand and then select the largest-νsn patterns.
Timeslots are scheduled to users with largest demand
first.

•

Note that power allocation is optimized following Alg. 2 in
the above benchmarks. Among benchmarks, the Best-channel
scheme outperforms the other two but yields larger
capacity-demand mismatch over the proposed schemes. This
is because the proposed schemes consider both users’ channel conditions and demand when deciding user association
and perform joint optimization of power allocation and user
scheduling. Compared to the Best-channel scheme, the proposed schemes reduce the capacity-demand gap by 27.67%
and 44.92% when I3 = 1 and I3 = 50, respectively.
Next, we evaluate the capacity-demand gap performance of
the approaches with different beam pattern settings (5 patterns,
3 patterns, and 1 pattern) in Fig. 8. In the 3-pattern scheme,
each satellite can generate beams with 3-dB beamwidths
{1◦ , 2◦ , 3◦ }. As for schemes with single pattern, Alg. 1
is employed to decide user association and then Alg. 2 is
adopted to perform power and user scheduling. The resulted
capacity-demand gap increases with the growth of the average requested demand. Among single-pattern schemes, the
one with 2.5◦ beamwidth outperforms the others. Functioned
with multiple beam patterns, 3-pattern and 5-pattern schemes
improve the capability of meeting users’ demand, with 31.46%
and 46.68% reduction of capacity-demand gap over the
single-pattern scheme with 2.5◦ beamwidth, respectively.
In Fig. 9, we evaluate the average power consumption
per satellite of different schemes. Generally, the power consumption rises with the number of users K but tends to be

Fig. 9. Power consumption of the schemes with different beam pattern
settings, where the average demand is 200 Mbps.

Fig. 10. Average number of associated users (with Rk ≥ Rkmin ) achieved by
the schemes with different beam pattern settings, where the average demand
is 200 Mbps.

steady when K is large. Particularly, the single-pattern scheme
with 1◦ beamwidth results in the least power consumption in
spite of the worst performance in reducing capacity-demand

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:58:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEI et al.: SPATIAL–TEMPORAL RESOURCE OPTIMIZATION FOR UNEVEN-TRAFFIC LEO SATELLITE SYSTEMS

1289

pattern selection and user-LEO association, and then jointly
optimize user-slot scheduling and power allocation. We have
revealed facts for guiding algorithm design. That is, to mitigate the mismatch effect, users with better channel and high
demand are prone to be served by narrow beams with low
radiated interference to other users. Furthermore, we have
proposed a swap-based update strategy to iteratively reduce the
capacity-demand gap. Numerical results have demonstrated a
good tradeoff of the designed scheme between performance
and complexity and the advanced capability of matching
capacity to demand when extra flexibility in spatial domain
is introduced.
A PPENDIX
Fig. 11. Gap performance of LEO satellite systems with the coexistence of
satellite payloads with both conventional single pattern and multiple patterns.
Note that beamwidth is set to 2◦ in the single-pattern scheme. Here, the
average demand is 200 Mbps and K = 20.

gap. With more flexibility introduced in spatial domain,
the 5-pattern scheme can guarantee good capacity-demand
matching with power consumption smaller than the other
four single-pattern schemes. Moreover, the capability of user
association of different schemes is presented in Fig. 10. Compared to the single-pattern scheme with 2◦ beamwidth, which
performs the best with the most associated users, the 5-pattern
and 3-pattern schemes sacrify 8.04% and 10.13% performance, respectively. The designed multiple-pattern scheme can
achieve a good balance between capacity-demand matching
and power consumption/user association over conventional
single-pattern schemes.
In practical systems, LEO satellites equipped with advanced
payloads (adopting the multiple-pattern scheme) would coexist
with those equipped with conventional payloads (using the
single-pattern scheme). We evaluate the performance of scenarios with different types of satellite payloads in Fig. 11. The
more satellites are equipped with multiple beam patterns, the
more spatial-domain flexibility is offered and thus the more
reduction in capacity-demand gap is obtained. By introducing
adaptive beam patterns, the capacity-demand gap is largely
reduced by 91.59% and 76.19% when N = 5 and N = 3,
respectively.

A. Proof of Proposition 1
We prove the proposition
by contradiction. Assume that
P
there exist users with
s∈S xskt Rskt + R̄kt > Dk at the
−
optimum of P2 (t). Denote St+ and SP
t as the sets of satellites
offering P
their scheduled users with s∈S xskt Rskt + R̄kt >
∗
Dk and s∈S xskt Rskt + R̄kt ≤ Dk , respectively. Let Pst
be
the optimal power allocation and ϱ control the power of users
scheduled by satellites in St+ . Note that, at the optimum, ϱ is
set to 1. For users scheduled by satellites in St+ , the optimal
SINR expression is derived as,
γskt =

P
s′ ∈St+ \{s}

∗
|hsk |2 ϱPst
P
,
|hs′ k |2 ϱPs∗′ t +
|hs′ k |2 Ps∗′ t + σ 2
s′ ∈St−

(30)
Similarly, the optimal SINR of users scheduled by satellites
in St− is expressed as,
γskt =

P
s′ ∈St+

∗
|hsk |2 Pst
P

|hs′ k |2 ϱPs∗′ t +

s′ ∈St− \{s}

|hs′ k |2 Ps∗′ t + σ 2

,

(31)

VII. C ONCLUSION

∗
, we view the objective as the function of
With the optimal Pst
ϱ and derive the derivative of the objective regarding ϱ in (32),
as shown at the bottom of the page. Note that
X

 ρ, if Rkmin >
xskt Rskt + R̄kt ;
ρ̄ =
(33)
s∈S

0, otherwise.

In this paper, we have investigated joint resource optimization and discussed synergies of spatial-temporal domain
flexibilities when adopting adaptive beam patterns with flexible user scheduling in LEO satellite systems. We have
designed an algorithmic framework to first determine beam

We can observe that the derivative of the objective with respect
to ϱ is larger than 0. This result conveys that the objective
value could be smaller if we lower transmit power of satellites
in St+ by reducing ϱ, which is contrary the assumption of
optimality. Hence the proposition.

!
ρ̄skt )γskt
xskt (1+
ϱ(1+γskt )

X X
P
s∈St− k∈K

s′ ∈St+

|hs′ k |2 ϱPs∗′ t +

P
s′ ∈St+

γskt
xskt ϱ(1+γ
skt )

|hs′ k |2 Ps∗′ t

P
s′ ∈St− \{s}

|hs′ k |2 Ps∗′ t + σ 2

+

X X
P
s∈St+ k∈K

s′ ∈St+

P
s′ ∈St− \{s}

|hs′ k |2 ϱPs∗′ t +

|hs′ k |2 Ps∗′ t + σ 2

P
s′ ∈St− \{s}

|hs′ k |2 Ps∗′ t + σ 2

(32)

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:58:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1290

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 42, NO. 5, MAY 2024

R EFERENCES
[1] F. Rinaldi et al., “Non-terrestrial networks in 5G & beyond: A survey,”
IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 165178–165200, 2020.
[2] O. Kodheli et al., “Satellite communications in the new space era:
A survey and future challenges,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 23,
no. 1, pp. 70–109, 1st Quart., 2021.
[3] V. L. Foreman, A. Siddiqi, and O. De Weck, “Large satellite constellation
orbital debris impacts: Case studies of OneWeb and SpaceX proposals,”
in Proc. AIAA SPACE Astronaut. Forum Expo., Sep. 2017, p. 5200.
[4] M. Y. Abdelsadek, H. Yanikomeroglu, and G. K. Kurt, “Future ultradense LEO satellite networks: A cell-free massive MIMO approach,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. Workshops (ICC Workshops), Jun. 2021,
pp. 1–6.
[5] B. Di, H. Zhang, L. Song, Y. Li, and G. Y. Li, “Ultra-dense LEO:
Integrating terrestrial-satellite networks into 5G and beyond for data
offloading,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 47–62,
Jan. 2019.
[6] H. Al-Hraishawi, H. Chougrani, S. Kisseleff, E. Lagunas, and
S. Chatzinotas, “A survey on nongeostationary satellite systems: The
communication perspective,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 25,
no. 1, pp. 101–132, 1st Quart., 2023.
[7] G. Maral, M. Bousquet, and Z. Sun, Satellite Communications Systems:
Systems, Techniques and Technology. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2020.
[8] K. Y. Zhong, Y. J. Cheng, H. N. Yang, and B. Zheng, “LEO satellite
multibeam coverage area division and beamforming method,” IEEE
Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 20, pp. 2115–2119, 2021.
[9] Y. Su, Y. Liu, Y. Zhou, J. Yuan, H. Cao, and J. Shi, “Broadband LEO
satellite communications: Architectures and key technologies,” IEEE
Wireless Commun., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 55–61, Apr. 2019.
[10] M. Takahashi, Y. Kawamoto, N. Kato, A. Miura, and M. Toyoshima,
“Adaptive power resource allocation with multi-beam directivity control
in high-throughput satellite communication systems,” IEEE Wireless
Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 1248–1251, Aug. 2019.
[11] G. Angus, R. Li, and V. Mak-Hau, “FlexBeamOpt: Hybrid solution
methodologies for high-throughput GEO satellite beam laydown and
resource allocation,” Int. J. Satell. Commun. Netw., vol. 41, no. 6,
pp. 515–538, 2023.
[12] P. J. Honnaiah, N. Maturo, S. Chatzinotas, S. Kisseleff, and J. Krause,
“Demand-based adaptive multi-beam pattern and footprint planning for
high throughput GEO satellite systems,” IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc.,
vol. 2, pp. 1526–1540, 2021.
[13] J. A. Vásquez-Peralvo et al., “Flexible beamforming for direct radiating arrays in satellite communications,” IEEE Access, vol. 11,
pp. 79684–79696, 2023.
[14] F. G. Ortiz-Gomez, M. A. Salas-Natera, R. Martínez, and S. LanderosAyala, “Optimization in VHTS satellite system design with irregular
beam coverage for non-uniform traffic distribution,” Remote Sens.,
vol. 13, no. 13, p. 2642, Jul. 2021.
[15] H. Chaker, H. Chougrani, W. A. Martins, S. Chatzinotas, and J. Grotz,
“Matching traffic demand in GEO multibeam satellites: The joint use of
dynamic beamforming and precoding under practical constraints,” IEEE
Trans. Broadcast., vol. 68, no. 4, pp. 819–833, Dec. 2022.
[16] S. Tani, K. Motoyoshi, H. Sano, A. Okamura, H. Nishiyama, and
N. Kato, “An adaptive beam control technique for Q band satellite
to maximize diversity gain and mitigate interference to terrestrial networks,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 115–122,
Jan. 2019.
[17] A. Guidotti, “Beam size design for new radio satellite communications
systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 68, no. 11, pp. 11379–11383,
Nov. 2019.
[18] X. Hu, Y. Zhang, X. Liao, Z. Liu, W. Wang, and F. M. Ghannouchi,
“Dynamic beam hopping method based on multi-objective deep reinforcement learning for next generation satellite broadband systems,”
IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 630–646, Sep. 2020.
[19] F. G. Ortíz-Gómez, R. M. Rodríguez-Osorio, M. Salas-Natera, and
S. Landeros-Ayala, “Adaptive resources allocation for flexible payload
enabling VHTS systems: Methodology and architecture,” in Proc. 36th
Int. Commun. Satell. Syst. Conf. (ICSSC), Oct. 2018, pp. 1–8.
[20] A. Wang, L. Lei, X. Hu, E. Lagunas, A. I. Pérez-Neira, and
S. Chatzinotas, “Adaptive beam pattern selection and resource allocation for NOMA-based LEO satellite systems,” in Proc. IEEE Global
Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2022, pp. 674–679.
[21] 3GPP, Technical Specification Group Radio Access Network: Study on
New Radio (NR) to Support Non-Terrestrial Networks (Release 15),
V15.4.0, document TR 38.811, 3GPP, 2020.

[22] T. H. Cormen, C. E. Leiserson, R. L. Rivest, and C. Stein, Introduction
to Algorithms. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2022.
[23] K. Shen and W. Yu, “Fractional programming for communication
systems—Part I: Power control and beamforming,” IEEE Trans. Signal
Process., vol. 66, no. 10, pp. 2616–2630, May 2018.
[24] G. H. Golub and C. F. Van Loan, Matrix Computations. Philadelphia,
PA, USA: JHU Press, 2013.
[25] S. Xia, Q. Jiang, C. Zou, and G. Li, “Beam coverage comparison of LEO
satellite systems based on user diversification,” IEEE Access, vol. 7,
pp. 181656–181667, 2019.
[26] L. You, K.-X. Li, J. Wang, X. Gao, X.-G. Xia, and B. Ottersten, “Massive
MIMO transmission for LEO satellite communications,” IEEE J. Sel.
Areas Commun., vol. 38, no. 8, pp. 1851–1865, Aug. 2020.
[27] T. Zhou, Z. Liu, J. Zhao, C. Li, and L. Yang, “Joint user association
and power control for load balancing in downlink heterogeneous cellular
networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 67, no. 3, pp. 2582–2593,
Mar. 2018.

Lei Lei (Member, IEEE) received the B.Eng. and
M.Eng. degrees from Northwestern Polytechnic University, Xi’an, China, and the Ph.D. degree from the
Department of Science and Technology, Linköping
University, Sweden, in 2016. He was a Research
Assistant with the Institute for Infocomm Research
(I2R), A*STAR, Singapore, in 2013. He was with
the Interdisciplinary Centre for Security, Reliability and Trust (SnT), University of Luxembourg,
as a Research Associate and a Research Scientist,
from 2016 to 2021. He is currently an Associate
Professor with the School of Information and Communications Engineering,
Xi’an Jiaotong University. He coauthored the IEEE ComSoc Best Readings in Satellite Mega Constellations and Non-Orthogonal Multiple Access.
His current research interests include resource allocation and optimization
in terrestrial-satellite networks, energy-efficient communications, and deep
learning in wireless communications. He received the IEEE Sweden Vehicular
Technology-Communications-Information Theory (VT-COM-IT) Joint Chapter Best Student Journal Paper Award in 2014. He was a co-recipient of the
IEEE SigTelCom 2019 Best Paper Award.

Anyue Wang (Student Member, IEEE) received
the bachelor’s and master’s degrees in communication engineering from Beijing University of Posts
and Telecommunications (BUPT), Beijing, China, in
2015 and 2018, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree
from the Interdisciplinary Center for Security, Reliability and Trust (SnT), University of Luxembourg,
Luxembourg, in 2022. From 2022 to 2023, he continued as a Research Associate with SnT, University
of Luxembourg. His research interests include
optimization and machine learning for resource management in wireless communication systems.

Eva Lagunas (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in telecommunications engineering from the Polytechnic University
of Catalonia (UPC), Barcelona, Spain, in 2010 and
2014, respectively. She was a Research Assistant
with the Department of Signal Theory and Communications, UPC, from 2009 to 2013. During
the Summer of 2009, she was a Guest Research
Assistant with the Department of Information Engineering, Pisa, Italy. From November 2011 to May
2012, she held a Visiting Research appointment
with the Center for Advanced Communications (CAC), Villanova University,
Villanova, PA, USA. In 2014, she joined the Interdisciplinary Centre for
Security, Reliability and Trust (SnT), University of Luxembourg, where she
currently holds a research scientist position. Her research interests include
radio resource management and general wireless networks optimization.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:58:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEI et al.: SPATIAL–TEMPORAL RESOURCE OPTIMIZATION FOR UNEVEN-TRAFFIC LEO SATELLITE SYSTEMS

Xin Hu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc.
degree in electrical information engineering from
Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan, China, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical information engineering from the Institute of
Electrics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
China, in 2012. In 2016, he joined Beijing University
of Posts and Telecommunications, where he is currently an Associate Professor. From 2019 to 2020,
he was a Visiting Scholar with the iRadio Laboratory, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
His current research interests include artificial intelligence empowering
wireless communication, digital predistortion and the application of signal
processing techniques to RF and microwave problems, and dynamic radio
resource management.

Zhengquan Zhang (Member, IEEE) received the
M.Sc. degree in communication and information system and the Ph.D. degree in information
and communication engineering from Southwest
Jiaotong University, Chengdu, China, in 2008 and
2019, respectively. From 2016 to 2017, he was a
Guest Ph.D. Student with the KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden. Since 2019, he has
been an Associate Professor with the Department
of Communication Engineering, Southwest Jiaotong
University. His research interests include B5G and
6G mobile communications, space-air-ground-sea integrated networks, high
mobility wireless communications, and intelligent transportation and communication networks. He was a recipient of the IEEE VTS 2023 Best Magazine
Paper Award.

1291

Zhiqiang Wei (Member, IEEE) received the B.E.
degree in information engineering from Northwestern Polytechnical University (NPU), Xi’an,
China, in 2012, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering and telecommunications from
the University of New South Wales (UNSW),
Sydney, Australia, in 2019. From 2019 to 2020,
he was a Post-Doctoral Research Fellow with
UNSW. From 2021 to 2022, he was a Humboldt
Post-Doctoral Research Fellow with the Institute for
Digital Communications, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg (FAU), Erlangen, Germany. He is currently a
Professor with the School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong
University, Xi’an. He coauthored the IEEE ComSoc Best Readings on OTFS
and Delay Doppler Signal Processing. His current research interests include
delay-Doppler communications, resource allocation optimization, and statistic
and array signal processing. He received the Best Paper Award at the IEEE
ICC 2018 and the IEEE WCNC 2023. He was the Organizer/Chair of several
workshops and tutorials on related topics of orthogonal time frequency space
(OTFS) in IEEE flagship conferences, including IEEE ICC, IEEE WCNC,
IEEE VTC, and IEEE ICCC. He is the Founding Co-Chair (publications) of
the IEEE ComSoc Special Interest Group on OTFS (OTFS-SIG).

Symeon Chatzinotas (Fellow, IEEE) is currently
a Full Professor and the Head of the SIGCOM
Research Group, SnT, University of Luxembourg.
He has been a Visiting Professor with the University
of Parma, Italy, and was involved in numerous
RD projects for NCSR Demokritos and CERTH
Hellas and CCSR, University of Surrey. He has
(co)authored more than 700 technical papers in refereed international journals, conferences, and scientific
books. He is coordinating the research activities on
communications and networking across a group of
80 researchers, acting as a PI for more than 40 projects and main representative
for 3GPP, ETSI, DVB. He was a co-recipient of the 2014 IEEE Distinguished
Contributions to Satellite Communications Award and the Best Paper Award
at WCNC, 5GWF, EURASIP JWCN, CROWNCOM, and ICSSC. He is also
serving on the Editorial Board for IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C OMMUNI CATIONS , IEEE O PEN J OURNAL OF V EHICULAR T ECHNOLOGY , and the
International Journal of Satellite Communications and Networking.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:58:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

