This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TVT.2026.3722870

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

1

Graph Neural Network Assisted Deep
Reinforcement Learning Based Hierarchical Routing
in Mega LEO Satellite Constellation
Shenzhan Xu, Student Member, IEEE, Rongke Liu, Senior Member, IEEE, Hangyu Zhang,
and Aryan Kaushik, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Mega low-Earth-orbit (mLEO) constellations with
inter-satellite links (ISLs) enable wide-area data delivery, but
routing in such systems is challenged by large network scale,
time-varying link availability, and spatially concentrated hotspot
traffic. This paper studies task route setup over the satellite ISL
segment and develops a learning-based hierarchical framework
that decomposes source-to-egress ISL route setup into interregion route setup and intra-region path construction. At the
upper layer, regions perform synchronized neighbor message
passing on the slot snapshot to generate local embeddings,
and a parameter-sharing graph neural network (GNN)-assisted
Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) policy determines the interregion route through sequential local decisions of the currently
active region agent. This design avoids satellite-level real-time
global search while preserving sensitivity to regional load and
boundary-link conditions. To improve training under sparse
success feedback, a heuristic teacher-guided warm start provides
soft guidance in the early stage of policy learning. At the lower
layer, a load-aware shortest-path method constructs executable
intra-region segments, and each segment is revalidated at its
actual start slot so that local repair can be triggered by link
disruptions or capacity blocking. Using a simulation environment
built from real two-line element (TLE) data and the Simplified
General Perturbations 4 (SGP4) propagator, we evaluate the
proposed method under different task sizes and runtime ISL
failures. The results show that the proposed method achieves a
favorable trade-off among task success rate, penalized average
delay, and load balance, while maintaining robust performance
under runtime ISL failures.
Index Terms—LEO constellation, route planning, graph neural
network, deep reinforcement learning.

I. I NTRODUCTION

This work was supported in part by the Low-Altitude Airspace Strategic
Program Portfolio under grant Z25306105, in part by the Shenzhen Fundamental Research Project under grant JCYJ20220818103413029, and in part by the
Shenzhen Science and Technology Program under grant ZDCY202517012.
Shenzhan Xu is with the School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China, and the Shen Yuan
Honors College, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China, and also with
Shenzhen Institute, Beihang University, Shenzhen 518063, China (e-mail:
SplayXu@buaa.edu.cn).
Rongke Liu is with the Shenzhen Institute, Beihang University, Shenzhen 518063, China, and also with the School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China (e-mail:
rongke liu@buaa.edu.cn).
Hangyu Zhang is with China Mobile Research Institute, Beijing 100053,
China (e-mail: zhanghangyu@chinamobile.com).
Aryan Kaushik is with OUF Innovative, UK, and with RakFort, Dublin 2,
D02 K227 Ireland, and also with the Indraprastha Institute of Information
Technology Delhi, New Delhi 110020, India (e-mail: a.kaushik@ieee.org).

W

ITH the growth of the information industry and advances in reusable rocket technologies [1], mega low
Earth orbit (mLEO) satellite constellations have developed
rapidly in recent years. Such constellations for broadband
access and global coverage are important components of
future 6G networks [2]–[4]. Compared with traditional satellite
communication systems, mLEO constellations offer lower
propagation delay, better coverage continuity, and stronger
redundancy [5]. Their large deployment scale also reduces
average manufacturing and launch cost through mass production and multi-satellite launches [6]. More importantly,
inter-satellite links (ISLs) enable multi-hop space networking,
allowing data to be relayed directly across satellites and
reducing dependence on ground facilities [7].
Despite these advantages, providing global end-to-end connectivity in mLEO constellations remains challenging. Limited
onboard resources require congestion-aware load allocation
under scarce capacity [8]. ISLs may become intermittently
unavailable because of acquisition, pointing, and tracking
(APT) errors [9] and other disturbances. In addition, orbital
dynamics and spatially concentrated task arrivals can produce
localized hotspot traffic that concentrates load on a small
set of links, and shortest-path routing alone may therefore
cause persistent hotspots and cascading congestion [10]. The
key challenge is to maintain high reachability and low delay
while distributing load under rapidly changing topology and
intermittent link failures.
In recent years, routing for mLEO constellations has attracted increasing attention. Traditional methods such as the
selective iterative Dijkstra algorithm (SIDA) were studied in
[11], [12], but routing that depends on global information
faces synchronization and dissemination difficulties at large
scale. Learning-based routing has also been explored [13]–
[15]. These methods usually make decisions from local observations, but many do not explicitly model localized hotspot
traffic. Another line of work combines graph neural networks
(GNNs) with deep reinforcement learning (DRL) [16], [17]
to extract broader structural features. However, the evaluated
constellations are still limited in size, typically around 1,000
satellites or fewer, and explicit load-balancing design for
localized hotspot traffic remains insufficient.
To complement existing studies, we consider hotspot-aware
task routing in an mLEO constellation with thousands of satellites and directional backhaul traffic under localized hotspot
traffic. The considered task route starts from a source satel-

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:51:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TVT.2026.3722870

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

lite and ends at a gateway-visible egress satellite. The S2G
segment is represented by the selected egress satellite and
is not separately optimized. We develop a learning-based
hierarchical routing framework that decomposes source-toegress ISL route setup into inter-region route setup with
synchronized region-level embedding preparation and intraregion path construction. At the beginning of each slot, each
region builds local features from the current snapshot and
exchanges compact regional and boundary-link messages only
with adjacent regions for several synchronous rounds to obtain
slot-level local embeddings. Based on these embeddings, a
parameter-sharing regional policy is invoked sequentially by
the currently active region agent to determine the next region
hop. The inter-region route is thereby established through local
decisions. We formulate routing as a joint optimization of
source-to-egress ISL delay and congestion-aware load balance.
For upper-layer route setup, we combine a GNN encoder
with Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) and introduce a
heuristic teacher-guided warm start [18] in training, where a
computable reference policy provides soft guidance in early
episodes to ease the cold-start problem caused by sparse
success feedback at large scale. The main contributions of this
paper are summarized as follows:
1) We propose a scalable learning-based hierarchical routing
framework for mLEO constellations that decomposes
source-to-egress ISL route setup into inter-region route
setup with synchronized region-level embedding preparation and intra-region path construction. The upper layer
performs a finite number of synchronized local-neighbor
message-passing rounds on the region graph to generate
slot-level regional embeddings, and a parameter-sharing
regional policy establishes the inter-region route through
sequential local decisions of the currently active region
agent. At the lower layer, executable inter-satellite path
segments are constructed inside each visited region, with
execution-time revalidation and local repair when necessary.
2) We formulate a joint optimization problem of sourceto-egress ISL delay and network load balance under
localized hotspot traffic. Based on slot-level regional
embeddings, we use a GNN-assisted PPO scheme for
inter-region route setup, in which each regional agent
uses only its local observation and candidate-direction
information. We further introduce a heuristic teacherguided warm start to improve early-stage training stability
and convergence speed.
3) We construct an mLEO simulation environment using
real two-line element (TLE) [19] data and the Simplified
General Perturbations 4 (SGP4) propagator tool. The environment models satellite orbits, link visibility, gateway
station connectivity, time-indexed link reservation, and
runtime ISL failures, enabling realistic network topology
and visibility conditions for routing evaluation. Experimental results across multiple scenarios show that the
proposed method achieves a favorable trade-off among
multiple performance metrics compared with representative benchmark algorithms.

2

The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Section
II introduces related work. Section III presents the system
model and problem formulation. Section IV describes the proposed method. The simulation results are shown and discussed
in Section V. Finally, Section VI concludes this article.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Hierarchical Routing Methods
In hierarchical routing, [20] proposed LoHi, a load-aware
hierarchical information-centric routing protocol for largescale LEO satellite networks. It partitions the constellation
into satellite groups, uses logical path identifiers to represent
adjacent-group connectivity, and adjusts forwarding according
to group-level path load and real-time ISL conditions. This
design improves scalability and load awareness, but it mainly
operates as a protocol and forwarding architecture based
on hierarchical tables and heuristic decisions. [21] proposed
a quality-of-service (QoS)-oriented hierarchical scheme in
which a double deep Q-network (DDQN) selects links to balance path length and congestion. However, the evaluation was
conducted on relatively small networks, and the authors also
noted potential uncertainty in convergence. [22] decomposed
routing into control-domain-partition-driven distributed routing and link-state-aware dynamic decisions, restricting linkstate exchange to local and neighboring domains and using
a deep Q-network (DQN) for path selection. [23] proposed
a software-defined networking (SDN)-based clustered routing
scheme in which controllers handle intra-cluster state collection and rule installation, while inter-cluster forwarding adopts
destination-geography heuristics to reduce signaling overhead.
Without global network state, however, purely distributed
inter-cluster routing may produce suboptimal paths, including
zig-zag routes.
These studies show that partition-based routing can reduce
signaling overhead and improve scalability, but they are mainly
based on protocol mechanisms, heuristic forwarding, or persatellite decisions. In this paper, we focus on hotspot-aware
source-to-egress ISL route setup in a larger mLEO constellation and study learned inter-region route setup with GNNextracted local embeddings, PPO-based directional action selection, and executable intra-region path construction under
time-varying links.
B. Intelligent Routing Based on GNN and DRL
Machine learning, especially DRL, has attracted increasing attention in satellite network routing, and many recent
methods therefore combine DRL with GNNs. [24] proposed
the GRLR method, which uses a GNN to extract graph
features and applies DRL to learn the path-selection policy.
This method can handle dynamic topology changes and timevarying link characteristics, thereby reducing end-to-end delay
and improving network throughput. [25] proposed an intersatellite routing method that integrates GNNs with DRL. Its
key idea is to use a graph convolutional network (GCN) to
capture topology dynamics and output node feature vectors,

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:51:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TVT.2026.3722870

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

while DRL optimizes routing decisions. [26] proposed a DRLbased routing mechanism using a spatiotemporal GNN (STGNN). It introduces routing-associated age of information
(RAoI) as a timeliness metric and designs a spatiotemporal
feature extraction module. [27] proposed a fully distributed
dynamic packet-routing algorithm based on GNN-enhanced
multi-agent reinforcement learning (GNN-MADRL). It uses
a graph attention network (GAT) to process local topology
and generate node embeddings, together with multi-agent
coordination.
These studies present several GNN-assisted DRL-based
routing methods. Some also evaluate mLEO constellations
with more than one thousand satellites. However, most of them
focus on general dynamic routing or timeliness optimization
rather than hotspot-aware load balancing under spatially localized traffic concentration. In addition, route planning over
very large constellations still faces a scale challenge, because
satellite-level planning becomes difficult as the constellation
grows. The present work therefore focuses on hierarchical
source-to-egress ISL route setup with GNN-assisted regionlevel representation learning and synchronized regional decisions for large-scale mLEO constellations under localized
hotspot traffic.
III. S YSTEM M ODEL AND P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
This section first introduces the system model of the mLEO
satellite network. The source-to-egress ISL delay and resource
occupancy of tasks are then formulated. Finally, we present the
joint optimization problem of source-to-egress ISL delay and
load balance. The main notation is summarized in Table I.
A. Constellation Model
We consider an mLEO satellite constellation with thousands
of satellites interconnected by ISLs, where traffic can be
downlinked through a gateway station. The satellite set is
denoted by V = {1, 2, . . . , N }, where N is the constellation
size. The gateway station is denoted by g and has a fixed
geographic location. We adopt the Walker-delta constellation
specified by i/NL /ML /F in [28], where i, NL , ML , and F
denote the orbital inclination, the number of orbital planes,
the number of satellites per plane, and the phasing factor,
respectively.
For inter-satellite connectivity, a fixed candidate ISL neighbor set Nicand is predefined for each satellite i. Owing to
the structural properties of Walker-delta constellations, each
satellite can establish ISLs with its two adjacent satellites in
the same orbital plane and with adjacent satellites in the two
neighboring planes. A wrap-around rule is adopted to preserve
connectivity at the boundaries. When the orbital-plane index or
phase index exceeds its valid range, the candidate connection
is formed with the satellite on the opposite boundary. We
define the ISL edge set as E ⊆ V × V. ISLs are assumed to
be bidirectional under normal conditions, that is, if (i, j) ∈ E,
then (j, i) ∈ E. This connectivity model keeps the routing
action space structurally consistent in large-scale networks.
For satellite-to-ground (S2G) communication, connectivity
between the gateway and satellites is determined by S2G

3

TABLE I: NOTATIONS
Notation
V
N
g
Nicand
E
θmin
Vtg
T
Tsim
∆t
ri (t)
rg
K
k
tk
tk,h
C
ρbg
ij (t)
ρbg,max
ρij (t)
ρblk
αkij (t)
α0
ageo
ij (t)
ablk
ij (t)
aotg
ij (t)
aij (t)
c0
E(t)
sk
dk
Bk
Pk
Hk
max
Hsat
prop
τij
(t)
tx
τk,h
Tk
Tpen
T̃k
V reg
E reg
κ(·)
Phseg
JFI(t)
T̄
J¯
λT
λJ

Definition
Satellite set
Number of satellites
Gateway station
Candidate ISL neighbor set of satellite i
Candidate ISL set
Minimum elevation angle threshold
Gateway-visible satellites at time t
Time-slot index set
Number of simulation slots
System time slot length
Position vector of satellite i at time t
Position vector of gateway station g
Task set
Task index
Generation slot of task k
Start time of hop h of task k
ISL capacity
Background occupancy ratio
Upper bound of the background occupancy ratio
Total occupancy ratio of link (i, j) at time t
Blocking threshold for link admission
Reserved occupancy ratio of task k on link (i, j) at time t
Fixed occupancy ratio per admitted task
Geometric availability indicator
Blocking availability indicator
Runtime-failure availability indicator
Link availability indicator
Speed of light
Available link set at time slot t
Source node of task k
Gateway-visible egress satellite of task k
Data size of task k
Source-to-egress ISL path of task k
Hop count of task k
Maximum satellite hop count
Propagation delay
Transmission delay of task k at hop h
Source-to-egress ISL delay of task k
Penalty delay assigned to failed tasks
Penalized delay of task k
Region set
Region-edge set
Satellite-to-region mapping
Satellite-level segment at inter-region step h
Network-wide Jain’s fairness index
Long-term average penalized delay
Long-term average Jain’s fairness index
Weight coefficient of the delay term
Weight coefficient of the load-balance term

visibility and elevation angle. We consider a single gateway
station with a fixed geodetic location to support S2G traffic
transmission. The gateway employs a minimum elevation
angle threshold θmin . If the LOS condition is satisfied and
the elevation angle is no smaller than θmin , the satellite is
regarded as visible to the gateway and an S2G link can be
established. The set of satellites visible to the gateway at time
t is denoted by Vtg . We use real TLE data to describe satellite
orbits and apply the SGP4 orbit propagator over the entire
simulation period to compute the time-varying position of each
satellite. This setting captures realistic geometric relationships
and visibility variations. The system model is shown in Fig.
1.
We assume that the system operates in discrete time slots,
following our previous work [29]. The slot index set is denoted
by T = {0, 1, . . . , Tsim − 1}, and the duration of each slot is

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:51:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TVT.2026.3722870

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

4

Remote
Sensing
Satellite

Traffic Generation Region

Mega-LEO
Communication
Constellation

Remote
Sensing
Aerial
Vehicles

Traffic Generation Region

Gateway Connectable Satellite Region

Satellite Gateway

Fig. 1: The network model of the proposed mLEO constellation.

∆t. At each slot, SGP4 provides the satellite position vector
ri (t) ∈ R3 , while the gateway position vector is denoted
by rg ∈ R3 . ISL availability and S2G link availability are
assumed to remain unchanged within one slot. Based on
link visibility and geometric distance, link availability and
propagation delay can therefore be determined.
B. Communication and Delay Model
We model traffic at the task level. The task set is denoted by
K. For any task k ∈ K, its data volume is set to be Bk > 0. In
each time slot, the system generates one task for scheduling.
Localized burstiness is modeled as spatial concentration over
a refresh window, where consecutive tasks are sampled from
localized source and egress patches.
We assume a constant inter-satellite transmission capacity
for ISLs, which is supported by in-orbit experiments in [30].
Given the relative stability of optical ISLs and the predictable
orbit geometry, this assumption is suitable for routing in most
cases. For any ISL (i, j), the nominal transmission capacity is
set to C, and all ISLs are assumed to have the same capacity.
To better reflect practical operation, each ISL carries a
small amount of background traffic for necessary inter-satellite
information exchange. This traffic occupies part of the total
link capacity. The background occupancy ratio on link (i, j)
at time t is denoted by ρbg
ij (t) ∈ [0, 1) and satisfies
0 ≤ ρbg
ij (t) ≤ ρbg,max < 1,

fraction of C reserved for task k on link (i, j) at time t. The
total occupancy ratio of link (i, j) is defined as
ρij (t) = ρbg
ij (t) +

X

k
αij
(t),

(2)

k∈Kij (t)

where Kij (t) denotes the set of tasks that are either transmitting on link (i, j) at time t or have completed resource
reservation but have not yet started transmission. For simplicity, we assume that each task admitted to a link uses a fixed
occupancy ratio α0 ∈ (0, 1) throughout its reservation and
transmission period. Such reservations are time-indexed in
simulation, so ρij (t) includes active transmissions and active
reservations with release times later than t. The number of
tasks that can be carried in parallel is therefore limited by the
total occupancy constraint.
We consider that link availability is determined by three
factors: geometric availability, occupancy-threshold blocking,
and runtime failures. We use ageo
ij (t) ∈ {0, 1} to denote the
geometric-availability indicator determined by the line-of-sight
(LOS) condition. Since practical systems typically cannot operate at the theoretical capacity limit, an occupancy threshold
ρblk ∈ (0, 1] is introduced to model blocking caused by
link occupancy. To avoid timing ambiguity between admission
checking and occupancy updates, the link occupancy ratio
immediately before admitting new tasks at time t is denoted
by ρij (t− ). A link is regarded as unavailable for routing and
scheduling once the occupancy reaches the threshold:

(1)

where ρbg,max is the upper bound of the background occupancy ratio.
We further assume that ISLs employ mature multiplexing
techniques, and multiple tasks can be transmitted in parallel
on one link. To limit decision dimensionality and system complexity, a reservation-based resource-allocation mechanism is
adopted as in [31]: once a task is scheduled, its allocated
communication resources are reserved and remain occupied
until completion. Resource allocation is characterized by a
k
capacity occupancy ratio. Let αij
(t) ∈ [0, 1] denote the


−
ablk
ij (t) = I ρij (t ) < ρblk .

(3)

To capture disruptions caused by non-geometric factors such
as transient hardware glitches, APT errors, and short-term
anomalies, we introduce a binary runtime failure indicator
aotg
ij (t) ∈ {0, 1}. The stable-link setting is obtained by
setting aotg
ij (t) ≡ 1 for all links and slots. In the runtimefailure setting, failures are generated by a scheduled linkdisruption process. Let Plf denote the trigger period, plf the
per-link failure probability at a trigger slot, and Dlf the
failure duration in slots. At every trigger slot τ satisfying

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:51:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TVT.2026.3722870

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

5

(τ − 1) mod Plf = 0, each candidate ISL that is not already in
a failure interval is independently checked. Each checked ISL
is determined to suffer a runtime failure with probability plf .
These failure events are independent and identically distributed
across checked ISLs at each trigger slot. If link (i, j) is
determined to fail at slot τ , both directions of this ISL are
set to unavailable during [τ, τ + Dlf ) and are restored after
the interval. Equivalently, aotg
ij (t) = 0 when t falls into an
active runtime-failure interval of link (i, j), and aotg
ij (t) = 1
otherwise. The final availability of link (i, j) at time t is
defined as
otg
blk
aij (t) = ageo
ij (t) · aij (t) · aij (t).

(4)

When aij (t) = 0, link (i, j) is unavailable at time t. Based
on the above model, the delay of each hop in multi-hop
transmission can be derived. The routing path of task k is an
ordered node sequence Pk = vk,0 , vk,1 , . . . , vk,Hk , where
Hk is the hop count. A store-and-forward mode is assumed,
so the task can enter the next hop only after completing transmission on the current hop. Propagation delay is computed
from geometric distance. If task k uses link (i, j) at time t,
the propagation delay is
prop
τij
(t) =

∥ri (t) − rj (t)∥
,
c0

(5)

where ri (t) is the satellite position vector and c0 is the speed
of light. Transmission delay depends on the task data volume
and the allocated throughput. During execution, each hop is
admitted only if the link is available and sufficient occupancy
headroom exists at the actual transmission-start time, that is,
aij (t) = 1,

node sk ∈ V, and its destination node is the gateway-visible
egress satellite dk ∈ V. The route therefore starts from sk and
ends at dk . The S2G segment is represented by the choice of
dk and is not optimized as a separate routing segment. The
network is modeled as a directed graph G = (V, E), where V is
the satellite set and E is the candidate ISL set. The availability
of link (i, j) ∈ E at time t is described by aij (t) ∈ {0, 1},
and the set of available links is defined as
E(t) ≜ {(i, j) ∈ E | aij (t) = 1}.

For task k, its routing path is represented by an ordered
node sequence

Pk = vk,0 = sk , vk,1 , . . . , vk,Hk = dk ,

(6)



vk,h , vk,h+1 ∈ E tk,h , ∀k, ∀h = 0, 1, . . . , Hk − 1. (12)
According to Section III-B, the total occupancy ratio of link
(i, j) ∈ E at time t is ρij (t) and it is subject to the occupancy
threshold ρblk . A task must satisfy the admission condition in
(6) when it enters the transmission stage of a link.
For the delay metric, the propagation delay of each hop
prop
tx
τij
(t), the per-hop transmission delay τk,h
, and the sourceto-egress delay Tk follow (5), (7), and (9), respectively. To
handle failed tasks within a unified objective, we introduce
a penalty delay constant Tpen > 0 and define the penalized
delay T̃k as

T̃k =

−

where t denotes the pre-admission state right before resources are allocated to the new task at time t. Once admitted,
the task transmits on that link with occupancy ratio α0 until
completion. The transmission delay of hop h is defined as
tx
τk,h
=

Bk
,
α0 · C

(7)

where tk,h denotes the start time when task k enters the
transmission stage of hop h, which is obtained recursively
from the completion time of the preceding hop by
tx
tk,h+1 = tk,h + τvprop
(tk,h ) + τk,h
,
k,h vk,h+1

h = 0, . . . , Hk − 1.
(8)
The source-to-egress ISL delay of task k is the sum over
hops:
Tk =

HX
k −1

τvprop
k,h vk,h+1

tk,h



tx
+ τk,h



.

(9)

h=0

C. Problem Formulation
Based on the communication and delay model in Section
III-B, we formulate a long-term routing optimization problem.
For any task k ∈ K, the task is generated at slot tk at source

(11)

where Hk is the hop count. The reachability requirement of
each hop is

(

ρij (t− ) + α0 ≤ ρblk ,

(10)

Tk ,
if task k successfully reaches dk ,
Tpen , otherwise.

(13)

Failure events include, but are not limited to, the following
cases: the satellite link is unavailable, the admission condition is violated, or the destination is not reached before the
maximum satellite hop limit. The long-term average penalized
delay is defined as
h i
T̄ ≜ E T̃k .
(14)
We use the global Jain’s fairness index (JFI) [32] to characterize network load balance, where the statistics are computed
over the currently available ISL set E(t). Since ρij (t) already
represents the link occupancy ratio, the JFI at time t is given
by

JFI(t) =









!2
P

ρij (t)

(i,j)∈E(t)

P

|E(t)|



(i,j)∈E(t)



0,

,
ρ2ij (t)

P

ρij (t) > 0,

(i,j)∈E(t)

otherwise.

(15)
When no link carries traffic, such as under total link failure,
we set JFI(t) = 0 as a sentinel value to explicitly indicate this
abnormal case. Since JFI is a network-wide fairness metric, it

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:51:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TVT.2026.3722870

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

6

is later complemented by HSI in Section V-C to capture load
concentration on heavily utilized links. To reflect long-term
balance, we define the time-average JFI as

A. Hierarchical Routing Mechanism

(17)

In mLEO satellite networks, source-to-egress ISL route
setup is difficult because of the large network scale and timevarying link conditions. Collecting and synchronizing global
network state over thousands of nodes is costly for online
decision making, whereas purely hop-by-hop local decisions
tend to accumulate errors on long paths. In addition, ISLs
may fail intermittently because of APT errors, and a single
intermediate failure can invalidate the whole route. To address
these issues, we decompose routing into inter-region route
setup and intra-region path construction.

where λT > 0 and λJ > 0 are weight coefficients. Here,
T̄ captures task-level source-to-egress transmission efficiency
and incorporates the cost of failure through Tpen , while J¯
regularizes network-level load distribution to avoid persistent
overload on hotspot links caused by shortest-path-only routing.
The proposed optimization problem is described as:

We partition the constellation into Nreg regions, denoted by
V reg = {1, 2, . . . , Nreg }, and use a mapping κ : V → V reg
to assign each satellite to a region. Regions are grouped by
orbital plane and phase indices and remain fixed during the
simulation. Region adjacency follows a four-neighbor grid
(up/down/left/right) with wrap-around at boundaries, which
yields the inter-region topology G reg = (V reg , E reg ).

J¯ ≜ E [JFI(t)] .

(16)

In summary, under long-term task arrivals, we seek a routing
policy π that jointly optimizes the average penalized delay
and the long-term load balance subject to time-varying link
availability and capacity-admission constraints. We adopt a
weighted-sum single-objective formulation:
max −λT T̄ + λJ J¯
π

h i
max − λT E T̃k + λJ E[JFI(t)]
π


s.t. vk,h , vk,h+1 ∈ E tk,h , ∀k, ∀h,


ρvk,h vk,h+1 t−
k,h + α0 ≤ ρblk , ∀k, ∀h,
ρij (t) ≤ ρblk , ∀(i, j) ∈ E, ∀t,
vk,h ̸= v

k,h′

′

, ∀k, ∀h ̸= h ,

max
Hk ≤ Hsat
, ∀k.

(18)
(18a)
(18b)
(18c)
(18d)
(18e)

Constraint (18a) enforces physical reachability at the corresponding start time of each hop. Constraint (18b) requires
each hop to satisfy the admission condition under the preadmission occupancy convention. Constraint (18c) limits the
total occupancy of every link at any time. Constraint (18d)
prevents repeated nodes in a path and thus avoids loops and
backtracking. Constraint (18e) bounds the hop count by the
max
.
maximum satellite hop limit Hsat
Since routing, admission, and path-structure constraints involve discrete decisions coupled with varying link availability
and network load, the above formulation can be viewed as a
long-term mixed-integer nonlinear optimization problem. Conventional optimization methods often struggle to obtain highquality solutions at the target constellation scale under such
dynamics. We therefore adopt a GNN-assisted PPO approach,
in which region-level graph embeddings support sequential
inter-region decisions for hotspot-aware task routing.
IV. P ROPOSED M ETHOD
This section presents the proposed hierarchical routing
framework for mLEO constellations. We first describe the
overall routing mechanism, then introduce the upper-layer
inter-region route-setup design, including GNN-based feature
extraction and PPO-based directional action selection. We also
present the warm-start mechanism used in training. Finally, we
describe the intra-region path construction strategy and analyze
the overall complexity.

For task k with source sk and destination dk , we map
them to regions csrc
= κ(sk ) and cdst
= κ(dk ). We then
k
k
perform learning-based inter-region route setup on the region
graph after synchronized local-neighbor embedding preparation. At planning step h, using the slot-level local embeddings
generated by a finite number of synchronized local-neighbor
message-passing layers, the agent of the current region ch
selects the next region ch+1 under a parameter-sharing policy
using its local observation. The selected inter-region transition
(ch → ch+1 ) is first instantiated on the planning snapshot:
the system determines the boundary pair and constructs the
corresponding executable intra-region segment Phseg by a loadaware shortest-path algorithm. During execution, each segment
is revalidated at its actual start slot using the latest link
availability and time-indexed reservation state. The source-toegress ISL route is obtained by concatenating all successfully
instantiated satellite-level segments {Phseg }.
To improve execution robustness, we further introduce local
repair. If a planned segment becomes infeasible because of link
disruption or capacity blocking, the lower layer reruns intraregion path construction once with the same entry and exit
satellites. If the blocked part is a boundary ISL, the boundary
pair is reselected within the same inter-region direction. If
repair fails, the task is treated as failed for that segment. In this
case, the next intra-region segment is replanned accordingly.
The proposed hierarchical routing method is illustrated in
Fig. 2. Overall, region partitioning reduces the decision scale
and yields a two-stage routing design: inter-region route setup
keeps global planning complexity manageable, while intraregion path construction ensures path executability and enables
rapid local recovery. Since inter-region route setup involves
aggregating high-dimensional load and link availability information over a nontrivial region graph, we use GNN-based
representation learning and DRL-based decision making at
the region level, while adopting a traffic-aware shortest-path
method for intra-region path construction because the local
topology is much smaller.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:51:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TVT.2026.3722870

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

7

on G reg . For any directed edge (i → j), the edge-conditioned
message at layer l is computed by a message function ϕl (·):
(l)

mi→j = ϕl

h

(l)

(l)

hi , hj , ei→j

i

,

(22)

where [·] denotes vector concatenation. For node j, messages
from all incoming edges are aggregated as
(l)

aj =

X

(l)

mi→j .

(23)

i:(i→j)∈E reg

The next layer embedding is obtained by adding the selfloop term and applying an update network:

Source

Inter-Region Route Setup

Link Failure

Destination

Intra-Region Path Construction

Intra-Region Path Replanning

(l+1)

hj

Fig. 2: The proposed hierarchical routing procedure.

B. Graph Neural Network-Based Feature Extraction
At each planning step, the upper layer performs one interregion directional action selection on the directed graph
G reg = (V reg , E reg ), where V reg is the region set and E reg ⊆
V reg × V reg contains directed edges between adjacent regions.
For each region c ∈ V reg , its adjacency is indexed by the fourdirection set D, and Nd (c) denotes the neighboring region
reachable from c along direction d ∈ D.
At slot t, each region c is described by the node feature
h
in,std
xc (t) = ρin,p90
, ρ̄in
,
c
c , ρc
i
(19)
bun,std
ρbun,p90
, ρ̄bun
.
c
c , ρc
in,std
where ρin,p90
, ρ̄in
are the 90th percentile, mean,
c
c , and ρc
and standard deviation of ISL utilization over internal ISLs of
bun,std
are computed over
, ρ̄bun
region c, while ρbun,p90
c , and ρc
c
ISLs incident to boundary satellites of region c
For each directed edge (c → c′ ) ∈ E reg , we define the edge
feature

h
i
min
sum
std
ec→c′ (t) = ρp90
,
ρ
,
ρ
,
ρ
.
′
′
′
′
c→c
c→c
c→c
c→c

(20)

where these terms denote the 90th percentile, minimum, sum,
and standard deviation of the utilizations of boundary ISLs
connecting region c and region c′ , respectively.
Internal-region statistics summarize congestion inside a region, while direction-specific boundary-link statistics retain the
load state of each candidate crossing direction. Directly feeding these handcrafted statistics to the policy network would
expose only local summaries. To encode both regional context
and boundary-link conditions, we use an edge-conditioned
GraphSAGE encoder [33], [34]. The initial node embedding
is





(l)
(l)
= upl self l hj + aj ,

(24)

where self l (·) is the self-loop linear transform and upl (·) is
the update MLP. After L layers, the node embedding of region
c is
zc = h(L)
c .

(25)

Node embeddings alone do not explicitly distinguish different outgoing directions from the same region. We therefore
introduce an edge readout network to generate a directionspecific embedding for each directed region edge:
zec→c′ = edge ro ([zc , zc′ , ec→c′ ]) .

(26)

The encoder thus outputs both the region-state representation set {zc } and the action-specific representation set
{zec→c′ } for inter-region decision making. The encoder can
learn structural topology-conditioned regional representations
on the region graph. The node features summarize internalregion and boundary-link load states, while the directed edge
features describe the load condition of candidate inter-region
transitions. Unlike direct use of fixed engineered summaries
as PPO inputs, the edge-conditioned message-passing process
updates each region representation by combining the region’s
own state with edge-conditioned messages from neighboring
regions. Therefore, after L message-passing layers, zc contains
load and boundary-link context from the L-hop region-graph
neighborhood of region c. The edge readout further combines
zc , zc′ , and ec→c′ to produce a direction-specific representation for action c → c′ . This design is useful for inter-region
routing because congestion depends not only on the current
region, but also on neighboring-region load states and the
boundary ISLs used by different outgoing directions.

C. POMDP Design
h(0)
c = fin (xc ) ,

(21)

where fin (·) is a multilayer perceptron (MLP). We then perform L synchronized local-neighbor message-passing layers

We model the upper-layer planning process for one task
as a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP),
denoted by M = (S, A, P, r, O, γ).

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:51:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TVT.2026.3722870

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

8

1) State S: At planning step h, let ch denote the current
region. The latent state is

˜man ,
sh = G reg , L(t), Alink (t), ch , cdst
k , V h , τ h , dh

(27)

(a)

where ch denotes the neighboring region reached from ch by
action a, 1Vh is the visited-region mask induced by Vh , and
mh = [mh,a ]a∈A is the feasible-action mask.
3) Action Space A: An inter-region action is defined as
ah ∈ A = {Up, Right, Down, Left}. These four actions
specify only the next region direction and do not determine a
concrete boundary ISL pair or a satellite-level next hop. For
(a)
any a ∈ A, let ch denote the neighboring region reached from
the current region ch by action a. To ensure transition-level
validity, we introduce a feasible-action mask mh = [mh,a ]a∈A
during policy sampling and define the feasible action set as
(29)

The mask removes three types of moves: backtracking to
ch−1 , revisiting a region already in Vh , and directions that are
currently unavailable for cross-region transition. If Ah = ∅,
the episode terminates as failure.
4) Transition and Termination P: After selecting ah , the
(a )
next region is ch+1 = ch h . The environment then attempts
to instantiate the corresponding satellite-level segment Phseg
on the planning snapshot at slot tk . This planning-snapshot
feasibility check is the initial construction step; the segment
is later revalidated at its actual execution-start slot, where
capacity blocking or runtime link failure may trigger local
repair or task failure. Since the transition kernel is highdimensional and time-varying, we adopt a model-free DRL
approach.
5) Reward r: Since one episode corresponds to the routesetup process of a single task, the delay-related cost for a
planning step h that successfully instantiates a satellite-level
segment is defined as

cdelay
=
h

Qk,h −1 

X


tx
τvprop
(t
)
+
τ
,
k,h,q
v
k,h,q
k,h,q k,h,q+1

(31)

ρ̄out
ch ,ah

where L(t) and Alink (t) denote the load and link-availability
snapshots at slot tk , cdst
is the destination region, Vh is the
k
visited-region set, τh is the segment-start time proxy, and d˜man
h
is the Manhattan distance from ch to the destination region
cdst
k .
2) Observation O: The local observation at planning step
h is denoted by oh ∈ O, and only the current region accesses
the local observation
h


oh = zch ; concat zec →c(a) a∈A ;
h
i h
(28)
man
˜
dh ; 1Vh ; mh ,

Ah = {a ∈ A | mh,a = 1}.

out
in
cbal
h = w1 · ρ̄ch ,ah + w2 · ρ̄ch+1 ,

(30)

q=0



where Phseg = vk,h,0 , vk,h,1 , . . . , vk,h,Qk,h is the ordered
satellite sequence of the segment instantiated at planning step
h and Qk,h is the hop count of segment Phseg . The balancerelated cost is

where
is the mean utilization of boundary ISLs
leaving ch along ah , ρ̄in
ch+1 is the mean utilization of internal
ISLs in ch+1 , and w1 , w2 ≥ 0 are normalization weights. The
running reward is


rhrun = − wdelay · cdelay
+ wbal · cbal
.
(32)
h
h
This reward serves as a practical step-wise training objective
whose preference direction is consistent with that of the longterm objective in Section III, while remaining computable
from local segment-level quantities during route setup. Let
Isucc ∈ {0, 1} denote the success indicator of the whole
reg
trajectory, Tep ≤ Hmax
denote the realized number of interregion route-setup steps, and Ihseg ∈ {0, 1} denote whether
planning step h successfully instantiates the satellite-level
segment Phseg . The implemented reward for PPO is defined
as
Rsucc
Tep
− (1 − Isucc )I{h = Tep − 1}Rfail , h = 0, . . . , Tep − 1.
(33)

rh = Ihseg rhrun + Isucc

D. Proximal Policy Optimization
On the POMDP M, we adopt PPO-Clip [35] with generalized advantage estimation (GAE) [36] to learn the parametersharing inter-region policy πθ (ah | oh ) and value function
Vψ (oh ). Let (ϕ, θ, ψ) denote the shared encoder, policyhead, and value-head parameters. During deployment, for each
newly generated task, regions first participate in a finite number of synchronized local-neighbor message-passing rounds
on the region graph to generate slot-level local embeddings
from the current planning snapshot. At each planning step,
only the currently active region invokes the shared policy and
uses its local observation, while the environment instantiates
the selected segment under the current execution constraints.
The same slot-level embeddings are reused for the sequential
region-hop decisions of this task’s route setup. The DRL
decision is made from local observations with shared policy
parameters after region-level neighbor synchronization.
The policy head uses the action-wise feature


Xhπ (a) = zch , zec →c(a) , d˜man
, mh,a ,
h
h

(34)

h

(a)

where ch is the neighboring region reached by action a.
These action-wise features are concatenated to form Xπh . The
value head uses
h
i

XVh = zch , meana∈Ah zec →c(a) , d˜man
,
m
h .
h
h

(35)

h

The outputs are
zh = fθ (Xπh ; ϕ),

Vψ (oh ) = gψ (XVh ; ϕ).

(36)

We apply feasibility masking

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:51:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TVT.2026.3722870

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

9

Action
GNN
MPNN

Update

PPO

clip

min

ℒ &'*+ (,)

-. (/ |0 )

……

Node
Embeddings
&
Edge
Embeddings

-.123 (/ |0 )

Actor

Environment

67123 (0 )

Critic

67 (0 )

• (!)

"

54

clip

ℒ $ (%)

Update
Current Node

Node Features

1-hop Node

Rollout Buffer

Edge Features

2-hop Node

Fig. 3: The framework of GNN-assisted PPO.

z̃h,a = zh,a + (1 − mh,a ) (−M ),

M ≫ 1,

(37)

c = Eh [log πθ (ah | oh ) − log πθ (ah | oh )] .
KL
old

so that probability mass is assigned only to feasible actions,
and define

For value regression, we use

πθ (ah | oh ) = softmax(z̃h )ah .

Vψclip (oh ) = Vψold (oh )

(38)

Let dh ∈ {0, 1} denote the episode-termination indicator
after step h.
Tep −1
For an episode trajectory {(oh , ah , rh , dh )}h=0
with
reg
, the TD residual, GAE advantage, and return
Tep ≤ Hmax
target are
δh = rh + γ(1 − dh ) · Vψold (oh+1 ) − Vψold (oh ),


Tep −1−h

Âh =

X

(γλGAE )l 

l−1
Y

where ℓ(·) denotes the squared-error loss. To encourage exploration, an entropy regularizer is introduced:

(1 − dh+j ) δh+l ,

(40)

Âh − µÂ
,
σÂ + ϵadv

(41)

(42)

where µÂ and σÂ are the mean and standard deviation, and
ϵadv > 0 is a small constant for numerical stability.
The PPO ratio is
πθ (ah | oh )
.
πθold (ah | oh )

(43)

The clipped PPO objective is
h

Lclip (θ) = Eh min ρh (θ)Âh ,
 i
clip ρh (θ), 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ Âh ,
where ϵ > 0 is the clipping threshold and we monitor

H (πθ (· | oh )) = −

X

πθ (a | oh ) log πθ (a | oh ).

(48)

a∈Ah

The advantage is normalized within each PPO update:

ρh (θ) =

and let the value loss take the larger one of the unclipped and
clipped losses:
h


LV (ψ) = Eh max ℓ Vψ (oh ) − R̂h ,
(47)
i
ℓ Vψclip (oh ) − R̂h
,



R̂h = Âh + Vψold (oh ).

Âh ←

(46)

(39)

j=0

l=0


+ clip Vψ (oh ) − Vψold (oh ), −ϵ, ϵ ,

(45)

(44)

To stabilize early-stage training under sparse successful
trajectories, we employ a heuristic teacher-guided warm start
based on a cost-aware Dijkstra search on the region graph
under the current resource snapshot, yielding a reference
region path cT = [c0 , c1 , . . . , cKT ]. The teacher cost is

+ w2 ρ̄in
,
cost(c → n) = wdelay d˜man
+ wbal w1 ρ̄out
n
c,d(c,n)
n→cdst
k
(49)
where d˜man
is the Manhattan distance from region n to the
n→cdst
k
destination region cdst
k , and d(c, n) is the direction from c to
n. The teacher is intentionally used as a heuristic reachability
guide rather than an optimal routing oracle. It is used to
provide early successful trajectories when PPO rarely reaches
the destination by itself. The final policy is not trained to
imitate this heuristic. The delay and load-balance preferences
are optimized through the PPO reward and update in Eq. (33)
and Eq. (52) after reachability is learned. At the start of each
episode, we sample u ∼ Bernoulli(ϵT ). If the teacher action
aTh is feasible, a rollout-only logit bonus is added:

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:51:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TVT.2026.3722870

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

z̃h,a ← z̃h,a + βT I[a = aTh ],

10

(50)

where βT > 0 is the teacher bonus. This bonus is used only
for rollout sampling and is removed during optimization.
In our implementation, policy forward uses raw masked logits without teacher-logit injection during optimization. Moreover, the PPO policy loss, likelihood-ratio clipping, empirical
KL, and clip fraction are computed on samples from nonteacher episodes only. Teacher-guided samples are excluded
from the PPO policy loss, so Eq. (43)–Eq. (44) are evaluated
on the non-teacher data stream.
The teacher provides additional supervision through the
behavior cloning (BC) loss
1

X

h νh

h

LBC = − P

νh log πθ (aTh | oh ),

(51)

and LBC = 0 when no valid teacher labels exist in the minibatch.
Combining the above terms, we minimize the total loss:
min J = − Lclip (θ) + cv LV (ψ)
h
i
− cent Eh H πθ (· | oh ) + cbc LBC ,

ϕ,θ,ψ

(52)

where Lclip and the entropy term are computed on the nonteacher subset Mppo , LBC on the teacher-valid subset Mbc ,
and LV on the full mini-batch.
Algorithm 1 GNN-Assisted PPO
1: Initialize encoder ϕ, policy head θ, value head ψ, actor optimizer on (ϕ, θ), critic
optimizer on ψ, and schedulers (ϵT , cbc , cent ).

2: for iteration i = 1 to Imax do
3:
Collect rollouts in buffer B.
4:
for each episode do
5:
Sample teacher flag once: u ∼ Bernoulli(ϵT ).
6:
Build local region features by (19) and (20).
7:
Perform L synchronized local-neighbor message-passing rounds using (21)–
(24).

8:
if u = 1 then
9:
Run cost-aware Dijkstra using (49) to obtain the teacher path.
10:
end if
reg
11:
for planning step h = 0 to Hmax
− 1 do
V
12:
Build Xπ
h (a), Xh ; compute logits/value via (36).
13:
Apply feasibility masking via (37).
14:
if u = 1 and teacher action valid then
15:
Add teacher logit bonus via (50).
16:
end if
17:
Sample action from the masked policy via (38).
18:
Execute the selected inter-region transition.
19:
if dh = 1 then
20:
break
21:
end if
22:
end for
23:
end for
24:
Compute Âh , R̂h by (39)–(41); normalize by (42).
25:
for PPO epoch k = 1 to Kppo do
26:
for mini-batch M ⊂ B do
27:
Recompute raw masked logits and values on M.
28:
Split M into Mppo and Mbc .
29:
Compute PPO-only policy loss Lclip by (44) on Mppo .
30:
Compute value loss LV by (46) and (47) on M.
31:
Compute entropy by (48) on Mppo and BC by (51) on Mbc .
32:
Update (ϕ, θ) using the actor loss in (52) with global-norm clipping.
33:
Update ψ using LV with global-norm clipping.
34:
end for
35:
end for
36:
Monitor PPO-only KL by (45); update ϵT and cbc .
37: end for
38: Return (ϕ, θ, ψ).

After each PPO update, we compute the success rate of nonteacher episodes over the current update window and update
(ϵT , cbc ) by a threshold rule: when the rate exceeds a threshold, both are decreased by fixed steps. The entropy coefficient
is annealed once per update by cent ← max(cmin
ent , αent cent ). In
optimization, we use two optimizers with a shared encoder. We
first compute gradients of the total objective in Eq. (52), then
apply them by parameter groups: the actor optimizer updates
(ϕ, θ), while the critic optimizer updates ψ only.
E. Intra-Region Path Construction
At each successful upper-layer transition (ch → ch+1 ), the
environment constructs one executable satellite-level segment
on the planning snapshot at slot tk . Let Gch = (Vch , Ech )
denote the intra-region topology of the current region ch , and
out
let sin
denote the entry and exit satellites of the
h and sh
segment to be instantiated. For the selected region transition
(ch → ch+1 ) at planning step h, let Bch →ch+1 (tk ) denote
the set of available boundary ISLs between the two regions
on the planning snapshot. If Bch →ch+1 (tk ) = ∅, the current
route-setup episode terminates as failure. Otherwise, we select
the boundary pair (u∗ , v ∗ ) ∈ Bch →ch+1 (tk ) by scanning the
available boundary ISLs using actual ISL load information
within the selected region pair and choosing the pair with the
smallest snapshot cost. We then set sout
= u∗ as the exit
h
∗
in
satellite of region ch and sh+1 = v as the entry satellite of
region ch+1 .
We formulate intra-region path construction as a minimumout
cost path search from sin
on Gch . Since Gch is small,
h to sh
we adopt a load-aware Dijkstra algorithm whose edge cost
combines hop count and link-load terms to bypass congested
links while controlling path-length growth. For any local edge
(u, v) ∈ Ech , ρuv denotes the link-occupancy ratio corresponding to ρij (tk ) in Section III-B. Let ρmin = min(u,v)∈Ech ρuv
and ρmax = max(u,v)∈Ech ρuv . We normalize the link occupancy by

 ρuv − ρmin , ρ
max > ρmin ,
(53)
ρ̃uv = ρmax − ρmin
0,
ρ
=ρ .
max

min

We then define the local edge weight used by the intraregion Dijkstra search as a linear combination of a hop term
and a load term:
wuv = whop + βload ρ̃uv ,

(54)

where whop is the per-hop cost weight and βload is the
nonnegative load-cost coefficient shared by the local links.
Accordingly, the total cost of the intra-region segment Phseg
is
X
Cost(Phseg ) =
wuv .
(55)
(u,v)∈Phseg

With this cost design, higher link load leads to a larger
edge cost, so the planner tends to select edges with lower
load. If no feasible path exists under the selected boundary
pair, the current route-setup episode terminates as failure.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:51:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TVT.2026.3722870

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

Otherwise, the resulting path is used as the executable intraregion segment Phseg for the current planning step.
At execution time, the planned segment is revalidated using
the latest link availability and reservation state. Both link
disruption and capacity blocking can trigger one local repair
attempt. The region reruns the load-aware Dijkstra algorithm
once on the updated local topology and the latest load snapshot
to obtain a new feasible segment. If a boundary ISL becomes
unavailable or capacity-blocked, another feasible boundary
pair between the same two regions is selected. This repair step
uses the concrete boundary-link and intra-region link states
of the selected boundary. If the boundary pair is successfully
changed, the entry satellite of the next region will be altered,
automatically triggering another intra-region replanning of the
next region. If local repair and boundary-pair reselection fail,
the current task is regarded as failed.
F. Complexity Analysis
Assume that, in each planning episode, the region graph
contains Nreg = |V reg | region nodes and Mreg = |E reg |
directed edges. Let dn and de denote the node-feature and
edge-feature dimensions, respectively, H the GNN hidden
dimension, He the edge-embedding dimension, dr the edgereadout hidden dimension, L the number of message-passing
reg
the maximum number of inter-region routelayers, Hmax
setup steps, and dp the hidden dimension of the PPO policy and value heads. For intra-region path construction, let
Gch = (Vch , Ech ) denote the current region subgraph. Since
the region graph is encoded once in each planning episode,
the overall online complexity for a single task is

reg
Conline = O Nreg dn H + LMreg H(2H + de ) + Hmax
|A|d2p

+ Mreg (2H + de )dr + dr He


+ R |Vch | + |Ech | log |Vch | .
(56)
This equation describes the nominal single-task online complexity when each traversed region triggers one local shortestpath computation on Gch to construct the corresponding segment Phseg .
V. S IMULATION R ESULTS
This section presents a simulation analysis of the proposed
hierarchical routing strategy. First, the simulation parameters
are introduced. Next, a parametric analysis is performed to
illustrate the impact of PPO hyperparameters and to verify
the effectiveness of the teacher-guided warm start mechanism through ablation tests. Finally, the proposed method is
compared with benchmark algorithms under both stable link
conditions and runtime ISL failures.
A. Simulation Setup
We consider a mega LEO constellation constructed from
real TLE data. In the simulation, the constellation is instantiated as a Walker-delta-like LEO shell with 60 orbital planes
and 60 satellites per plane, yielding N = 3600. The Walker

11

structure defines the orbital-plane index, the in-plane satellite
index, the regular candidate ISL neighborhood, and wraparound connections, while TLE/SGP4 propagation provides
time-varying satellite positions, link distances, and gateway
visibility. A single gateway station provides S2G connectivity. To emulate spatially localized bursty traffic, one task is
generated per slot. During each refresh window, the source
and gateway-visible egress satellite are repeatedly sampled
from predefined patches.. The destination egress satellite is
selected from the satellites visible to the gateway station,
while the source patch is randomly chosen so that it does
not overlap with the destination patch. The patch side length
is set to Lpatch = 8 satellites, and the patch is refreshed every
Irefresh = 600 time slots to represent hotspot movement. For
each generated task, each route is first planned on the slot
snapshot and then checked during execution.
The main system parameters, together with the main GNN
and PPO hyperparameters, are summarized in Table II. For fair
comparison, all algorithms use the same task-generation process, task-size setting, reservation-based resource-allocation,
execution-time capacity check, and runtime ISL failure setting.
The global execution baselines output a full satellite-level
path and are checked by the global execution layer without
hierarchical segment-level local repair. The hierarchical execution baselines use the same region partition, lower-layer
path construction, execution-time revalidation, and local repair
mechanism as the proposed method. Failed tasks are counted
with a fixed 30 s penalty in the penalized average delay. The
baseline implementations are specified as follows:
1) Global centralized (GC): This baseline is a centralized
satellite-level Dijkstra method on the full 3600-node physical
graph, inspired by [37]. GC uses a load-aware shortest-hop Dijkstra mode. The load of each feasible physical ISL is defined
as the cost, and currently blocked physical ISLs are removed
from the search. After the full satellite path is obtained, it is
checked by the same time-indexed reservation and executiontime capacity mechanism used by the other algorithms. If
the planned global path contains a disrupted or capacityblocked link during execution, the task fails because GC does
not include the hierarchical segment repair or boundary-pair
reselection used by the hierarchical methods.
2) Global GNN-assisted PPO (GGAP): This baseline, inspired by [38], evaluates the effect of removing the proposed
regional hierarchy while keeping a GNN-assisted PPO planner.
GGAP performs next-hop routing directly on the full 3600node satellite graph. For each task, the physical satellite graph
is constructed from the current slot snapshot, where each satellite has four directed candidate ISL actions corresponding to
the top, right, bottom, and left physical neighbors with wraparound connectivity. For each satellite node i, GGAP uses a
7-dimensional node feature vector that includes normalized
column and row distances from satellite i to the destination
satellite, mean load ratio of the four outgoing candidate ISLs
of satellite i, minimum headroom ratio among these outgoing
candidate ISLs, normalized satellite coordinates, and a binary
indicator of whether satellite i is the current task destination.
For each directed physical ISL (i → j), GGAP uses a 3dimensional edge feature, including load ratio of the directed

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:51:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TVT.2026.3722870

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

TABLE II: SIMULATION PARAMETERS
Parameter
Orbital inclination i
Number of orbital planes NL
Satellites per plane ML
Phase factor F
Number of satellites N
Minimum elevation angle θmin
Time slot length ∆t
Total simulation slots Tsim
ISL nominal rate C
Background occupancy ratio ρbg
ij
Per-task occupancy ratio α0
Blocking threshold ratio ρblk
Runtime-failure per-link probability plf
Runtime-failure trigger period Plf
Runtime-failure duration Dlf
Region side length Sc
Number of regions Nreg
Regions per row Nreg,row
reg
Max inter-region route-setup steps Hmax
GNN layers L
GNN hidden dimension H
Edge embedding dimension He
Edge readout hidden dimension dr
PPO head hidden dimension dp
Discount factor γ
GAE parameter λGAE
PPO clipping threshold ϵ
Value loss coefficient cv
Initial teacher intervention probability ϵT
Teacher logit bonus βT
Warm-start success-rate threshold ζws
Teacher-probability decay step ∆ϵT
Mini-batch size Bmb
PPO epochs per update Kppo
Failure penalty Rfail
Terminal bonus Rsucc

Value
57
60
60
23
3600
10.0◦
0.1 s
30000
10000 Mbps
0.001
0.2
0.9
0.03
1 slot
20 slots
5
144
12
24
3
64
64
128
128
0.99
0.95
0.2
0.5
0.35
4
0.3
0.05
512
3
5.0
3.0

ISL, headroom ratio, and a binary blocked-link indicator.
GGAP uses the same edge-conditioned GraphSAGE form
and the same main PPO hyperparameters as the proposed
method. At each planning step, the current satellite scores
its four candidate physical next-hop actions. The action-wise
policy input concatenates the current satellite embedding, the
candidate-neighbor embedding, the corresponding directededge embedding, goal-related scalars, direction-risk terms, and
the graph readout. The feasible-action mask removes unavailable or capacity-blocked physical ISLs. Previously visited
satellites are not hard-masked, but revisits are penalized in the
reward. The planned satellite-level path is finally checked by
the execution-time capacity validation. Hierarchical segmentlevel local repair is not applied in this baseline.
3) Hierarchical Without GNN (No GNN): This baseline,
inspired by baseline algorithm selection in our previous work
[39], is designed to isolate the contribution of GNN-based representation learning. It keeps the same hierarchical POMDP,
four-direction region action space, feasible-action mask, reward design, PPO training hyperparameters, lower-layer path
construction, execution-time capacity check, and local-repair
mechanism as the proposed method, while removing the GNN
encoder and the direction-specific edge readout. No GNN
directly feeds handcrafted region-level features into PPO.
Specifically, it uses the same 22-dimensional local regional
context as the proposed method, as described earlier. For each

12

candidate region direction, the actor input is formed by directly
concatenating the current-region feature, candidate-neighbor
region feature, directed edge feature, goal-related scalars, and
direction-risk terms. Therefore, No GNN keeps the same
compact input categories and the same PPO training setting as
the proposed method, but removes topology-conditioned GNN
propagation and learned action-specific edge readout.
4) Heuristic hierarchical (HH): This baseline, inspired
by [40], evaluates whether the hierarchical decomposition
alone is sufficient without a learned inter-region policy. HH
keeps the same region partition, lower-layer path construction,
execution-time revalidation, and local repair mechanism as
the proposed method, but it does not construct or train any
GNN/PPO model. At the upper layer, HH performs deterministic hop-by-hop region selection. At each step, it enumerates
the four neighboring regions and selects the direction with
the smallest normalized region-level Manhattan distance to the
destination region. After the heuristic region path is selected,
HH uses the exact same lower-layer segment-instantiation
mechanism as the proposed method. For each selected interregion transition, the concrete boundary ISL pair is chosen
by scanning candidate boundary pairs and using the same
boundary-pair cost form as the hierarchical execution module, with distance and normalized boundary-load terms. The
corresponding intra-region segment is then constructed by the
shared load-aware shortest-path routine. Therefore, HH is a
deterministic hierarchical heuristic baseline: it preserves the
coarse-to-fine execution and local repair structure, but removes
both GNN-based representation learning and PPO-based interregion decision making.
B. Parametric Analysis
In this subsection, we conduct experiments to determine the
learning rate with the best convergence behavior and to verify
the effectiveness of the teacher-guided warm start through
ablation experiments.
Since actor updates depend on critic estimates, the critic
learning rate is set to twice the actor learning rate. For each
setting, we run 10 rounds with 3000 time slots each and
smooth the reward curves by exponential moving average
(EMA) and sliding-window averaging for readability.

Fig. 4: Comparison of convergence performance under
different learning rates.
The results show a clear pattern in Fig. 4. A large learning
rate, such as 0.01, causes strong oscillation and unstable training. Moderate values, especially 0.001 and 0.0005, converge

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:51:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TVT.2026.3722870

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

much more reliably, while 0.001 reaches a stable regime faster.
In contrast, very small learning rates, such as 0.0001 and
0.00005, make policy improvement too slow. We therefore
use 0.001 as the actor learning rate in the main experiments.

13

P

ρij (t)


top

P
η (t)
 (i,j)∈E
P
,
ρij (t) > 0,
HSI(t) =
(57)
ρij (t)
(i,j)∈E(t)


(i,j)∈E(t)


0,
otherwise.
The time-averaged HSI over a run with Tsim time slots is
HSI =

Fig. 5: Ablation test of teacher-guided warm start.
We then evaluate the teacher-guided warm start at the
two best learning rates, namely 0.001 and 0.0005. The goal
is to test whether teacher guidance improves convergence
in the early training stage when successful trajectories are
very sparse. As shown in Fig. 5, training with the teacher
mechanism converges earlier and remains stable, whereas
training without teacher guidance fails to achieve comparable
convergence under either learning rate. This indicates that
teacher guidance improves early sample quality and thus helps
PPO converge faster and more stably.
We also measure the online planning runtime of the proposed method in the above mentioned network. The measured
time includes online embedding generation, route setup, and
execution-time revalidation, excluding training updates, model
loading and checkpoint saving. The proposed method costs
32.38 ms on average, with a median of 31.06 ms and a 95th
percentile of 53.58 ms per measured task on an AMD Ryzen
7 5800 CPU.

C. Performance Comparison
This subsection compares all algorithms under two settings
with the same task-size sweep. We first study stable link
conditions to evaluate the trade-off among task success rate,
penalized average delay, and load balance. We then introduce
runtime ISL failures on the same setup to examine robustness
under link disruptions during execution.
We first introduce HSI as an auxiliary evaluation metric that
complements JFI. JFI measures overall load balance, whereas
HSI measures load concentration by quantifying how much of
the total load is concentrated on a small set of hotspot links.
Specifically, HSI is defined as the fraction of total link load
carried by the top η % highest-utilization links in each time
slot. We set η = 0.01, and let k(t) = max {1, ⌈η · |E(t)|⌉}
denote the number of top 1 % links with the largest utilization
values. The set of these links is written as Eηtop (t) ⊆ E(t).
The instantaneous HSI is

1

T
sim
X

Tsim t=1

HSI(t).

(58)

A smaller HSI indicates lower load concentration on a small
set of heavily utilized links. However, HSI should not be
interpreted alone because early task failure can also reduce
the amount of carried traffic on hotspot links.
We observe the performance of the algorithms under different nominal task-size levels. Each experimental point is
specified by a nominal task-size level Bnom . At the point
labeled Bnom = x Mb, the task size of each generated task is
randomly sampled from the interval [x − 50, x + 50] Mb. For
each nominal task-size level, we run the simulation 5 times
for each algorithm and present the overall averaged metrics.
1) Stable link conditions: Under stable link conditions,
links do not fail because of non-geometric events such as APT
errors or hardware glitches, that is, aotg
ij (t) ≡ 1. Fig. 6 reports
the performance under different nominal task-size levels. A
larger nominal task size increases the resource demand of
each task and makes admission control more restrictive. The
proposed method maintains high reachability in all tested
scenarios. Averaged over all task-size levels, it achieves a task
success rate of 0.9980, a penalized average delay of 9.01 s,
and JFI = 0.9853. At Bnom = 500 Mb, it still maintains a
task success rate of 0.9983 and a penalized average delay of
12.73 s. This shows that the proposed method can preserve
routing feasibility and load fairness under large task sizes.
GC gives a strong delay reference in the stable-link case.
At Bnom = 500 Mb, it achieves a task success rate of 0.9993
and a penalized average delay of 9.40 s. However, its shortesthop rule leads to poorer load distribution, with JFI = 0.7679
and HSI = 0.3117. No GNN keeps the same hierarchical
execution and repair mechanism as the proposed method, but
uses direct engineered-feature inputs instead of GNN message
passing and direction-specific edge readout. Its task success
rate and penalized average delay are 0.9697 and 15.16 s at
Bnom = 500 Mb. The gap between No GNN and the proposed
method shows the benefit of topology-conditioned regional
embeddings and direction-specific edge representations.
We use HH to further evaluate whether the hierarchical
execution structure alone is sufficient by using a distancebased hierarchical heuristic method. HH shares the same path
construction and repair setting as the proposed method. At
Bnom = 500 Mb, HH achieves a task success rate of 0.7070
and a penalized average delay of 16.51 s. This result shows that
the hierarchical execution structure needs to be coupled with
learned region-level decisions to maintain high reachability
under large task sizes. GGAP gives another reference by
applying direct satellite-level GNN-PPO routing on the full
graph. It also underperforms the proposed method in this

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:51:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TVT.2026.3722870

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

(a)

(b)

14

(c)

(d)

Fig. 6: Algorithm performance under different nominal task-size levels with stable link conditions. (a) Task success rate. (b)
Penalized average delay. (c) Jain’s fairness index. (d) Hotspot severity index.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 7: Algorithm performance under different nominal task-size levels with runtime ISL failures. (a) Task success rate. (b)
Penalized average delay. (c) Jain’s fairness index. (d) Hotspot severity index.

setting, with task success rate 0.6880 and penalized average
delay 16.40 s at Bnom = 500 Mb. Although GGAP reports a
low HSI, this value should not be interpreted as better hotspot
control. Its low success rate means that less traffic is carried,
which can also reduce the measured hotspot concentration.
Overall, under stable link conditions, the proposed method
provides a strong trade-off among success rate, penalized
average delay, JFI-based load balance, and HSI-based load
concentration.
2) Runtime ISL failures: We next evaluate the same tasksize sweep under runtime ISL failures. In this setting, some
ISLs become temporarily unavailable during execution because of non-geometric disruptions such as APT errors or
hardware glitches. The runtime-failure generator follows the
rule defined in Section III. The same runtime-failure profile
and random seed are used for all algorithms. The results are
shown in Fig. 7.
Runtime ISL failures make the difference between hierarchical route repair and global path planning clearer. Averaged
over all task-size levels, the proposed method achieves a task
success rate of 0.9410, a penalized average delay of 10.55 s,
and JFI = 0.9755. At Bnom = 500 Mb, it still achieves a
task success rate above 0.94 and a penalized average delay
of 14.09 s. These results show that the proposed method
maintains high reachability and low penalized delay under
execution-time link failures.
The global baselines are much more sensitive to runtime
ISL failures. At Bnom = 500 Mb, GC drops to a task success
rate of 0.3613, and GGAP drops further to a task success rate
of 0.1793. Their penalized delays are also higher than that
of the proposed method. Among the hierarchical baselines,

No GNN remains the closest one, with a task success rate of
0.8953 and a penalized average delay of 16.62 s. HH reaches
a task success rate of 0.6820 and a penalized average delay
of 17.39 s. These results confirm that hierarchical repair is
robust, but GNN-assisted inter-region decisions are still needed
for reliable route setup under runtime failures. Overall, the
proposed method provides the most balanced performance
across the four reported metrics in the runtime-failure setting.

VI. C ONCLUSION
This paper studied scalable routing for mLEO satellite
constellations under localized hotspot traffic. We proposed
a learning-based hierarchical routing framework that decomposes route setup into inter-region route setup and intraregion path construction. At the upper layer, regions generate
local embeddings through a finite number of synchronized
local-neighbor message-passing rounds on the region graph,
and a parameter-sharing GNN-assisted PPO policy selects the
inter-region route through sequential decisions based on local
observations. At the lower layer, executable satellite paths
are constructed by a load-aware shortest-path method, and
execution-time revalidation with local repair is used to handle
disrupted or capacity-blocked segments. Simulation results
obtained using real TLE data and SGP4 propagation under
varying task-size levels and runtime ISL failures showed that
the proposed method achieves a favorable overall trade-off
among task success rate, penalized average delay, JFI-based
load balance, and HSI-based load concentration under both
stable link conditions and runtime ISL failures.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:51:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TVT.2026.3722870

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

R EFERENCES
[1] P. A. Sonawane and L. Daniel Otero, “Analyzing the impact of
reusable rocket launch system failures on large-scale space missions:
A simulation-based approach,” in 2024 IEEE International Systems
Conference (SysCon), 2024, pp. 1–6. 1
[2] R. Singh, A. Kaushik, W. Shin, M. D. Renzo, V. Sciancalepore, D. Lee,
H. Sasaki, A. Shojaeifard, and O. A. Dobre, “Toward 6g evolution:
Three enhancements, three innovations, and three major challenges,”
IEEE Network, vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 139–147, 2025. 1
[3] M. A. Jamshed, A. Kaushik, M. Dajer, A. Guidotti, F. Parzysz, E. Lagunas, M. Di Renzo, S. Chatzinotas, and O. A. Dobre, “Non-terrestrial
networks for 6g: Integrated, intelligent, and ubiquitous connectivity,”
IEEE Communications Standards Magazine, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 86–93,
2025. 1
[4] N. O. Salau and M. Z. Shakir, “Non-terrestrial networks,” in NonTerrestrial Networks: Paving the Way towards Global Connectivity,
M. Z. Shakir and A. Kaushik, Eds. Elsevier, 2025, pp. 1–426. 1
[5] G. Xu, Y. Zhao, Y. Ran, R. Zhao, and J. Luo, “Spatial location aided
fully-distributed dynamic routing for large-scale leo satellite networks,”
IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 26, no. 12, pp. 3034–3038, 2022. 1
[6] X. Wang and S. Zhang, “Cost analysis for mass customized production
of satellites based on modularity,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 13 754–
13 760, 2021. 1
[7] R. Radhakrishnan, W. W. Edmonson, F. Afghah, R. M. RodriguezOsorio, F. Pinto, and S. C. Burleigh, “Survey of inter-satellite communication for small satellite systems: Physical layer to network layer
view,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 18, no. 4, pp.
2442–2473, 2016. 1
[8] E. Lagunas, F. G. Ortiz, G. Eappen, S. Daoud, W. A. Martins, J. Querol,
S. Chatzinotas, N. Skatchkovsky, B. Rajendran, and O. Simeone, “Performance evaluation of neuromorphic hardware for onboard satellite
communication applications,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 31,
no. 6, pp. 78–84, 2024. 1
[9] Y. Kaymak, R. Rojas-Cessa, J. Feng, N. Ansari, M. Zhou, and T. Zhang,
“A survey on acquisition, tracking, and pointing mechanisms for mobile
free-space optical communications,” IEEE Communications Surveys &
Tutorials, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1104–1123, 2018. 1
[10] T. Taleb, D. Mashimo, A. Jamalipour, N. Kato, and Y. Nemoto, “Explicit load balancing technique for ngeo satellite ip networks with onboard processing capabilities,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking,
vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 281–293, 2009. 1
[11] X. Liu, X. Yan, Z. Jiang, C. Li, and Y. Yang, “A low-complexity routing
algorithm based on load balancing for leo satellite networks,” in 2015
IEEE 82nd Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC2015-Fall), 2015, pp.
1–5. 1
[12] J. Liu, R. Luo, T. Huang, and C. Meng, “A load balancing routing
strategy for leo satellite network,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 155 136–
155 144, 2020. 1
[13] J. Zhou, Z. Sun, R. Zhang, G. Lin, S. Zhang, and Y. Zhao, “A cloudedge collaboration cnn-based routing method for isac in leo satellite
networks,” in Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Integrated Sensing
and Communications for Metaverse, ser. ISACom ’23. New York, NY,
USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2023, p. 25–29. 1
[14] S. Zhang, A. Liu, C. Han, K. An, Z. Lin, G. Ding, J. Wang, and
S. Chatzinotas, “Antijamming routing-based graph neural network for
satellite constellation defense,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and
Electronic Systems, vol. 62, pp. 8707–8713, 2026. 1
[15] C. Han, L. Huo, X. Tong, H. Wang, and X. Liu, “Spatial anti-jamming
scheme for internet of satellites based on the deep reinforcement learning
and stackelberg game,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
vol. 69, no. 5, pp. 5331–5342, 2020. 1
[16] H. Wang, Y. Ran, L. Zhao, J. Wang, J. Luo, and T. Zhang, “Grouting:
Dynamic routing for leo satellite networks with graph-based deep
reinforcement learning,” in 2021 4th International Conference on Hot
Information-Centric Networking (HotICN), 2021, pp. 123–128. 1
[17] Y. Kang, Y. Zhu, D. Wang, and Z. Han, “Efficient path selection design
for large scale leo satellite constellations using graph embedding-based
reinforcement learning,” IEEE Transactions on Network Science and
Engineering, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 2007–2020, 2025. 1
[18] I. Shenfeld, Z.-W. Hong, A. Tamar, and P. Agrawal, “TGRL: An
algorithm for teacher guided reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings of
the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, A. Krause, E. Brunskill, K. Cho,
B. Engelhardt, S. Sabato, and J. Scarlett, Eds., vol. 202. PMLR, 23–29
Jul 2023, pp. 31 077–31 093. 2

15

[19] H. QIN, R. DENG, and H. LYU, “Single-station tle estimation of nc-leo
satellite for space-based opportunistic positioning,” Journal of Beijing
University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, vol. 51, no. 12, pp. 4031–
4040, 2025. 2
[20] F. Yan, Z. Wang, S. Zhang, Q. Meng, and H. Luo, “Load-aware hierarchical information-centric routing for large-scale leo satellite networks,”
in 2024 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference
(WCNC), 2024, pp. 1–6. 2
[21] A. Cigliano and F. Zampognaro, “A machine learning approach for routing in satellite mega-constellations,” in 2020 International Symposium
on Advanced Electrical and Communication Technologies (ISAECT),
2020, pp. 1–6. 2
[22] P. Zhang, Z. Xian, M. Liao, H. Huang, and J. Yang, “Adaptive routing
mechanism for leo satellite network based on control domain partition,”
IEEE Transactions on Green Communications and Networking, vol. 9,
no. 1, pp. 70–82, 2025. 2
[23] M. M. H. Roth, H. Brandt, and H. Bischl, “Distributed sdn-based
load-balanced routing for low earth orbit satellite constellation networks,” in 2022 11th Advanced Satellite Multimedia Systems Conference
and the 17th Signal Processing for Space Communications Workshop
(ASMS/SPSC), 2022, pp. 1–8. 2
[24] S. Zhang, A. Liu, C. Han, X. Xu, X. Liang, K. An, and Y. Zhang, “Grlr:
Routing with graph neural network and reinforcement learning for mega
leo satellite constellations,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 3225–3237, 2025. 2
[25] P. Xu, M. Feng, J. Zhou, L. Xiao, P. Xiao, and T. Jiang, “Inter-satellite
routing for leo satellite networks: A gnn and drl integrated approach,” in
2024 IEEE/CIC International Conference on Communications in China
(ICCC), 2024, pp. 1346–1351. 2
[26] R. Gao, B. Zhang, Q. Zhang, and Z. Yang, “Toward the age in forwarding: A deep reinforcement learning enabled routing mechanism for largescale satellite networks via spatial–temporal graph neural networks,”
IEEE Transactions on Networking, vol. 34, pp. 292–307, 2026. 3
[27] Y. Ran, Y. Ding, S. Chen, J. Lei, and J. Luo, “Fully-distributed
dynamic packet routing for leo satellite networks: A gnn-enhanced
multi-agent reinforcement learning approach,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, vol. 74, no. 3, pp. 5229–5234, 2025. 3
[28] Q. Chen, L. Yang, J. Guo, X. Liu, and X. Chen, “Optimal gateway
placement for minimizing intersatellite link usage in leo megaconstellation networks,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 9, no. 22, pp.
22 682–22 694, 2022. 3
[29] H. Zhang, H. Zhao, R. Liu, X. Gao, and S. Xu, “Dynamic user
association and computation offloading in satellite edge computing
networks via deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Transactions on Green
Communications and Networking, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 1888–1901, 2024.
3
[30] M. Gregory, F. Heine, H. Kämpfner, R. Lange, M. Lutzer, and R. Meyer,
“Commercial optical inter-satellite communication at high data rates,”
Optical Engineering, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 031 202–031 202, 2012. 4
[31] H. Zhang, R. Liu, A. Kaushik, and X. Gao, “Satellite edge computing
with collaborative computation offloading: An intelligent deep deterministic policy gradient approach,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 10,
no. 10, pp. 9092–9107, 2023. 4
[32] R. K. Jain, D.-M. W. Chiu, W. R. Hawe et al., “A quantitative measure
of fairness and discrimination,” Eastern Research Laboratory, Digital
Equipment Corporation, Hudson, MA, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 2022–2023,
1984. 5
[33] M. Gori, G. Monfardini, and F. Scarselli, “A new model for learning
in graph domains,” in Proceedings. 2005 IEEE international joint
conference on neural networks, 2005., vol. 2. IEEE, 2005, pp. 729–734.
7
[34] W. Hamilton, Z. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation
learning on large graphs,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus,
S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, Eds., vol. 30. Curran Associates,
Inc., 2017. 7
[35] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov, “Proximal policy optimization algorithms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347,
2017. 8
[36] J. Schulman, P. Moritz, S. Levine, M. Jordan, and P. Abbeel, “Highdimensional continuous control using generalized advantage estimation,”
in ICLR, 2016. 8
[37] H. Aiache, V. Conan, L. Lebrun, and S. Rousseau, “ A load dependent
metric for balancing Internet traffic in Wireless Mesh Networks ,” in
2008 5th IEEE International Conference on Mobile Ad Hoc and Sensor
Systems (MASS). Los Alamitos, CA, USA: IEEE Computer Society,
Oct. 2008. 11

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:51:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TVT.2026.3722870

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

[38] S. Zhang, A. Liu, C. Han, R. Wang, X. Liang, X. Xu, and X. Lin,
“Graph neural network and reinforcement learning based routing for
mega leo satellite constellations,” in 2023 9th International Conference
on Computer and Communications (ICCC), 2023, pp. 1–6. 11
[39] S. Xu, R. Liu, H. Zhang, and A. Kaushik, “Heterogeneous resource
allocation in space–air–ground-integrated networks: A multiagent deep
deterministic policy gradient approach,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 12, no. 20, pp. 43 772–43 787, 2025. 12
[40] Y. Yao, Z. Peng, and B. Xiao, “Parallel hyper-heuristic algorithm for
multi-objective route planning in a smart city,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, vol. 67, no. 11, pp. 10 307–10 318, 2018. 12

16

Aryan Kaushik (Member, IEEE) is CEO at OUF
Innovative (UK) since 2026, CIO at RakFort (Ireland), and Adjunct Professor at IIITD (India) since
2025. His previous academic experience includes
Associate Professor at Manchester Met (UK, 202425), Senior Grade Assistant Professor at the University of Sussex (UK, 2021-24), and Research
Fellow at University College London (UK, 2020-21),
with affiliations to the University of Edinburgh and
HKUST. He also held visiting positions at institutions across Italy, Greece, the UK, Luxembourg, and
China. A Stanford/Elsevier Top 2% Scientist, he serves as a global external
assessor/examiner and reviews proposals for UK EPSRC and French ANR.
He holds key roles in IEEE such as Chair of the IEEE ETI on ESIT and SIG
on AITNTN, Vice Chair of one6G WG3, edited 5 books (Elsevier/Wiley)
and multiple IEEE journals—garnering seven Exemplary Editor awards (such
as for IEEE TMC, IEEE OJCOMS and IEEE COMML)—and founded
the IEEE ComSoc CTN Podcasts in 2023. He has delivered over 140
international invited/keynote speeches, chaired committees for 15+ flagship
IEEE conferences, and led 30+ IEEE workshops and special sessions.

Shenzhan Xu (Student Member, IEEE) received the
B.Sc. degree from the School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing,
China, in 2021. He is currently a Ph.D. candidate
with the School of Electronic and Information Engineering and the Shenyuan Honors College, Beihang
University, Beijing, China. His research interests
include satellite edge intelligence, space-air-ground
integrated networks and resource allocation.

Rongke Liu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.S. and Ph.D. degrees from Beihang University,
Beijing, China, in 1996 and 2002, respectively. He
was a Visiting Professor with the Florida Institute
of Technology, Melbourne, FL, USA, in 2006, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, in 2015, and The
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, U.K., in 2018,
respectively. He is currently a Full Professor with
the Shenzhen Institute of Beihang University and the
School of Electronic and Information Engineering,
Beihang University. He has authored or coauthored
more than 200 papers in international conferences and journals. His research
interests include wireless communication and space information networks.

Hangyu Zhang received the B.S. degree from the
School of Communication Engineering, Jilin University, Changchun, China, in 2019 and the Ph.D. degree from the School of Electronic and Information
Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China, in
2025. She is currently a researcher at the China
Mobile Research Institute. Her research interests
include 6G space-based computing, satellite-ground
integrated networks, and resource scheduling for
converged computing and communication.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:51:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

