2762

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 72, NO. 5, MAY 2024

Optimization for Dynamic Laser Inter-Satellite Link
Scheduling With Routing: A Multi-Agent Deep
Reinforcement Learning Approach
Guanhua Wang , Fang Yang , Senior Member, IEEE, Jian Song , Fellow, IEEE, and Zhu Han

Abstract— Laser inter-satellite links (LISLs) have greatly
extended communication distance between satellites, allowing for
establishment of dynamic links to reduce communication delay.
However, a closed-loop control is required for LISL, which causes
high energy consumption. Proper scheduling of dynamic LISLs
can effectively reduce energy consumption and communication
delay. In this study, a satellite link mode with three fixed LISLs
and one dynamic LISL is designed, and its feasibility is analyzed.
The optimization problem is formulated and transformed into a
Markov decision process (MDP) by modeling it as a sequential
decision problem. By decomposing states, actions, and reward
functions, the MDP is divided into the proposed multi-agent
deep reinforcement learning (MADRL). Moreover, compressed
sensing is utilized to cut down state information to reduce communication, storage, and computation overhead. Furthermore,
network parameters and experience sharing, and prioritized
experience replay have been adopted to improve stability and
convergence speed of network training with a large number of
agents. Experimental results show that under different routing
strategies, the proposed MADRL can reduce energy consumption
by over 15% and delay by approximately two hops compared to
fixed LISLs scenario within several iterations.
Index Terms— Laser inter-satellite link, dynamic link, multiagent deep reinforcement learning, link scheduling, routing
strategy.

Manuscript received 28 April 2023; revised 15 September 2023; accepted
19 December 2023. Date of publication 28 December 2023; date of current
version 17 May 2024. This work was supported in part by National Key
Research and Development Program of China under Grant 2022YFE0101700;
and in part by Science, Technology and Innovation Commission of Shenzhen
Municipality under Grant JSGG20211029095003004; and in part by NSF
CNS-2107216, CNS-2128368, CMMI-2222810, ECCS-2302469 Toyota and
Amazon. An earlier version of this paper was presented in part at the IEEE
GLOBECOM 2023 [1]. The associate editor coordinating the review of this
article and approving it for publication was M. Levorato. (Corresponding
author: Fang Yang.)
Guanhua Wang and Fang Yang are with the Department of Electronic
Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China, and also with
the Key Laboratory of Digital TV System of Shenzhen City, Research
Institute of Tsinghua University in Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518057, China
(e-mail: wanggh21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; fangyang@tsinghua.edu.cn).
Jian Song is with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, China, and also with the Shenzhen International
Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518055, China (e-mail:
jsong@tsinghua.edu.cn).
Zhu Han is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Houston, Houston, TX 77004 USA, and also with the
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Kyung Hee University,
Seoul 02447, South Korea (e-mail: hanzhu22@gmail.com).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TCOMM.2023.3347775.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2023.3347775

I. I NTRODUCTION

W

IRELESS communication based on ground base stations has been highly successful so far. However,
economic cost and construction difficulties make it challenging
to cover vast underdeveloped areas, sea areas, deserts, and
other remote regions. Moreover, ground base stations are
vulnerable to damage in the face of natural disasters such
as earthquakes and floods [2]. On the other hand, satellite
communication can cover most of the Earth’s surface and
play a significant role in disaster relief. Nevertheless, the
orbit of traditional communication satellites is high, which
causes long delays and high propagation loss. Additionally,
conventional satellite communications cannot satisfy the needs
of a large number of users for high-speed communications
simultaneously, and high communication cost reduces the
scope of application [3].
The next generation of satellite constellations represented
by Starlink enables mega low-Earth orbit (LEO) constellations
using technologies such as multiple cubesats launched by one
reusable rocket, reducing costs and providing users with more
communication resources. Moreover, Starlink plans to adopt
laser inter-satellite links (LISLs) in the next generation of constellations. Laser terminals can achieve a communication rate
of 10 Gbps at a distance of 4,000 km [4], which significantly
enhances overall throughput [5]. The stable establishment of
LISLs will eliminate the need for ground relays, improve
the throughput, and the propagation delay will be greatly
reduced [6], [7], making it different from classic delay-tolerant
networks.
However, the transmission distance of LISLs is significant, and the narrow laser beam requires more precise beam
alignment. Specifically, space-borne terminals must limit the
alignment error to 1 µrad, and thus a closed-loop feedback
mechanism is required to stabilize a link [4]. Therefore, laser
terminal must remain active to maintain the link, even during
idle periods, which will cause extra energy consumption of
the satellite with limited size, weight, and power [8]. Moreover, the fixed four LISLs with adjacent satellites adopted
by Starlink underutilizes laser terminals which can realize
inter-satellite communications of much longer distance [4],
and numerous LISLs are redundant from a network perspective [9]. The feasibility of permanent and temporary
links between non-adjacent satellites in Starlink constellation
was explored in [10], and the simulation results in [11]

0090-6778 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:55:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: OPTIMIZATION FOR DYNAMIC LISL SCHEDULING WITH ROUTING

demonstrated that temporary links bypassing the intermediate satellites can effectively reduce communication delay in
future satellite communication. Furthermore, as demonstrated
in [6] and [12], with the increase of constellations, the routing of satellite network will become increasingly complex.
Additionally, the study in [6] shows that, compared to the
shortest path, the delay penalty of sub-short path is often not
significant. Moreover, pursuing the shortest delay may lead
to an unbalanced network load, indicating that the balance
between delay and network load requires further research.
Furthermore, in other dynamic networks characterized by
evolving topologies and time-variable nodes, such as wireless
sensor networks [13], Internet of Vehicles [14] and Internet
of Things [15], researchers have also optimized routing and
link scheduling to improve communication efficiency, yielding
promising outcomes. Therefore, the link scheduling and routing strategy of satellite networks are essential topics worth
considering.
There has been some progress in the field of satellite network routing and dynamic link scheduling. A method employing reinforcement learning was suggested to optimize the total
throughput in a three-layer system [16], where the state was
compressed by the compressed sensing (CS) method [17].
Moreover, an energy-efficient route was devised based on a
study of satellite battery characteristics [8]. The scheduling
of dynamic link scheduling has been explored in [18], [19],
[20], [21], [22], and [23], involving the optimization of channel
capacity and delay through genetic algorithms in [18] and [19].
Approximate solutions were also presented for optimizing the
signal-to-noise ratio of dynamic links and resource allocation
for communication [20]. Furthermore, medium-Earth orbit
(MEO) and geosynchronous orbit (GEO) satellites were set as
relays for LEO satellites, with inter-layer links established to
minimize the hop count [21]. Additionally, over polar regions,
scheduling prevented frequent link handovers [22], and the
allocation of links and power was examined in [23]. Certain
studies have also delved into combining routing and link
scheduling techniques [24], [25], [26]. The throughput of a
delay-tolerant LEO satellite network with radio frequency (RF)
links was enhanced by utilizing link scheduling and optimizing
routing [24]. Then, a flexible satellite topology scheduling
achieved swift network reconstruction and mitigated routing
performance decline [25]. Additionally, the scheduling and
routing of LISLs were directly solved by mixed integer linear
programming in a small constellation [26].
However, traditional methods become significantly more
complex when the number of optimization variables increases.
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) can effectively address
this challenge and has attracted widespread attention in satellite scenarios [27], [28]. Therefore, applying DRL to satellite
routing and resource scheduling is a natural choice. DRL was
adopted to achieve routing for a single data flow in [29],
while multiple flows were researched in [30]. Moreover, DRL
was also employed to implement a dynamic inter-plane link
scheduling algorithm based on the signal-to-noise ratio and
distance between satellites [31], and to manage the communication capacity [32]. In addition, decomposing the scale
of problem is also a feasible solution to reduce complexity.

2763

Therefore, sliding windowing was utilized to reduce the size
of linear programming [24], and Benders decomposition was
applied to simplify the optimization problem [33].
The above works are effective, however, there are still
some shortcomings that need to be addressed. In comparison to terrestrial networks, the periodic patterns of satellite
networks in both time and space domains not only simplify
the problem, but also enable the design of link modes to
reduce energy consumption and average hop count. Moreover, lasers have considerably narrower beam widths than
RF signals, resulting in negligible inter-beam interference
but requiring more precise alignment, and the number of
establishing LISLs via a satellite is strictly bounded by the
quantity of space-borne laser terminals. Consequently, the link
model for LISLs differs from that of RF links, hence the
direct application of RF-based research to LISLs is challenging. Although numerous studies discuss the benefits of
dynamic scheduling for optical satellite networks, the majority
of research concerning LISL scheduling remains inadequately
integrated with routing strategies. In addition, the next generation of satellite networks requires real-time data transmission,
which is different from conventional delay-tolerant networks,
thus imposing stricter requirements on the time complexity of
algorithms. As satellite constellations further expand, both traditional methods and DRL encounter challenges in complexity
and convergence. Therefore, we propose a dynamic LISL
scheduling algorithm combined with specific route strategy
for large constellations, and provide novel contributions to the
problems:
1) A dynamic LISLs scheduling algorithm combined with
a specific routing strategy is proposed. The link mode of
a satellite with three fixed LISLs and one dynamic LISL
is designed and verified to fully utilize the potential
of space-borne laser terminals, and the scheduling of
dynamic links is optimized to balance the energy consumption caused by closed-loop control of LISLs and
the communication delay. The algorithm is implemented
across various scenarios to verify its effectiveness. Moreover, the results indicate that the alternating iteration
between routing and scheduling strategy could rapidly
reach a steady state.
2) A multi-agent deep reinforcement learning (MADRL)
method is investigated to solve the scheduling of
dynamic LISLs in large-scale constellations. By analyzing the utility of each dynamic LISL to the objective
function, the global reward is decomposed into respective rewards for each satellite. Network parameters and
experience sharing as well as prioritized experience
replay are utilized to enable the MADRL on large
constellations.
3) The scale of the LISLs state matrix is reduced by CS
due to the sparse nature of link state information. The
compression of state information not only reduces communication and storage overhead, but the compressed
data is also fed directly to a deep neural network (DNN),
in contrast to other literatures that necessitate recovery
before utilization, and thus leading to a reduction in the
scale of DNN and computational complexity.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:55:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2764

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 72, NO. 5, MAY 2024

The system architecture of LEO satellite communication network with dynamic LISLs.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
introduces the system model, including the architecture
of satellite network, LISLs mode, and traffic distribution.
Section III introduces the routing strategy, and the optimization
problem is formulated. The details of the proposed algorithm
are stated in Section IV, including the cooperative MADRL
and the structure of the DNN. The results are demonstrated in
Section V. Finally, this paper is summarized in Section VI.
II. S YSTEM M ODEL
In this section, the system architecture and network model
will be introduced. Additionally, the link model of LISLs and
data flow distribution will also be described.
A. System Architecture, Constellations and Network Model
As depicted in Fig. 1, the satellite communication network
in this paper comprises three layers. The LEO layer is utilized
for traffic access and transmission with LISL. The MEO/GEO
satellites monitor the status of the LEO layer and relay state
information to LEO satellites for resource allocation and the
decision of dynamic LISLs scheduling.
Among the three constellations introduced in [5], OneWeb is
utilized as the research subject in this paper, which has 18 orbit
planes (OPs) at an altitude of 1,200 km and 720 satellites in
its constellation. Walker constellation is adopted in OneWeb,
where each OP shares the same inclination and the right
ascension of ascending node of each plane is evenly distributed
in the equatorial plane. In order to avoid collisions among
satellites in different orbits, satellites in different orbital planes
need to maintain a certain phase difference. The constellation
adopted in this paper can be expressed by i : N/P/F notation
of the Walker constellation as 85◦ : 720/18/1, where i is the
orbital inclination, and N , P , and F denote the total number
of satellites, the number of orbital planes, and the phase factor
in the constellation, respectively. The phase difference ∆ϕ for
equivalent satellites in neighboring planes is given by
∆ϕ =

360◦
F,
N

(1)

resulting in a 0.5◦ change between satellites in adjacent
OPs. The sub-satellite point trajectory is shown in Fig. 3,
in which the arrows indicate the direction of satellites’ motion.
The satellite network topology can be represented by
the directed graph G=< V, E >, where V is the set
of vertices, namely the satellites, and is defined as
{i ∈ V|i = 1, 2, · · · , N }. Meanwhile, E is the set of edges,
and (i, j) ∈ E if and only if a link from i ∈ V to j ∈ V
is established. Moreover, each link (i, j) ∈ E is assigned a
capacity c(i, j).
B. Link Model and Classification of LISLs
LISLs exhibit extremely narrow beam widths, which require
high accuracy for acquisition, pointing, and tracking. Spaceborne laser terminals are utilized to meet these demands.
Each laser terminal can establish only one link with another
terminal, and since a closed-loop control is necessary to
maintain a LISL, if (i, j) ∈ E, and then (j, i) ∈ E. Moreover,
the number of LISLs that each satellite can establish is
strictly limited by the amount of space-borne laser terminals
NLISL . The set comprised of satellites with a direct link to
satellite k is defined as N (k), which can be expressed as
{m ∈ N (k)|m ∈ V, (m, k) ∈ E}, and thus |N (k)| ⩽ NLISL .
The link modes in the same constellation are divided into
intra-OP LISLs which are established between two satellites
in the same orbit, and inter-OP LISLs which are between
satellites in different OPs [10]. Satellites in the same orbit
are relatively stationary, and so the intra-OP link is easy to
establish. The inter-OP LISL are generally formed between
satellites in the same direction. For Starlink system, NLISL =
4, where two terminals are adopted for intra-OP links and the
others are for connecting satellites on the two sides of the
adjacent orbits in the same direction, as shown in Fig. 2(a).
The establishment of temporary links under Starlink constellation was discussed in [11]. Intuitively, this helps to
reduce the hop count for message propagation by bypassing
intermediate satellites, thus reducing the processing delay of
information. Meanwhile, as previously mentioned, due to the
uneven distribution of network load, links with low loads can

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:55:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: OPTIMIZATION FOR DYNAMIC LISL SCHEDULING WITH ROUTING

2765

Fig. 2. The diagram of LISLs mode in the constellation. (a) The fixed four LISLs with adjacent satellites mode. (b) The three fixed LISLs and one dynamic
LISLs mode, where the fixed LISLs form a T-shaped structure, and the dynamic LISLs have seven alternative linked objects or can be inactive.

Fig. 3.

The sub-satellite point trajectory of the constellation and the hot spot satellites selected at a certain time.

be inactive to reduce the overall power consumption of the
whole system. In this paper, to ensure the connectivity of
constellation and the basic communication performance, it is
guaranteed that each satellite has three fixed links to connect
with neighboring satellites, forming a T-shaped structure as
shown in Fig. 2(b). Meanwhile, a dynamic LISL can be
established between one of the seven alternative satellites or be
inactive. The numbers in the figure correspond to the possible
options, and zero represents an inactive LISL. Moreover, the
topology of the two adjacent satellites shows mirror symmetry,
and so the label of the adjacent satellite is also symmetry.
Based on the above discussion, E can be divided into the
fixed LISLs Ef and the dynamic LISLs Ed , and the feasible
region of Ed is denoted as Ω. Since V and Ef are constant,
there is a one-one mapping between G and Ed ⊂ Ω, and the

G can be rewritten as G(Ed ). Additionally, the requirements
to establish dynamic LISLs are analyzed in Appendix-A,
as well as the interference between dynamic and fixed LISLs
in Appendix-B. The results indicate all possible dynamic
LISLs are achievable with the terminals introduced by [4].
Moreover, interference between LISLs is negligible because of
the extremely narrow laser beams. Consequently, satellites can
simultaneously establish multiple LISLs for communications.
C. Traffic Distribution
Due to differences in economic development and population
density distribution, the majority of communication demands
are concentrated in a small number of highly developed land
areas. Consequently, only a small number of satellites in a

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:55:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2766

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 72, NO. 5, MAY 2024

constellation will carry most of the traffic at a time [8].
In this paper, these satellites are referred to as “hot spot”
satellites. Specifically, satellites primarily located in North
America, Europe, and Asia-Pacific regions are selected as
hot spot satellites set V h ⊂ V, and are highlighted in red
in Fig. 3. An “episode” is defined as the temporal interval
between two consecutive handovers of the traffic access point,
triggered by the high-speed motion of the satellite. K satellites
are randomly chosen from V h as the source and destination
nodes set V0 and remain fixed for a given episode. Traffic
is transmitted between each node in the V0 , and so there are
K(K − 1) data flows. Due to the motion of satellites and
changes in traffic demands, V0 will be reselected from V h in
the next episode.
Due to the rapid motion of LEO satellites, each episode
lasts merely a few minutes. The statistical attributes of data
flow exhibit minor alteration at this scale. Consequently, the
distribution of data flow volume is assumed to be stationary
within one episode. An episode is divided into T time slots,
and the traffic is evenly distributed in each time slot, while the
volume of data flow in time slot t from i ∈ V0 to j ∈ V0 is
t
written as fij
, and its transmission should be completed within
t
the current slot. Moreover, fij
is composed of independent
requests as
t
fij
= a1ij (t) + a2ij (t) + . . . + anij (t),

t = 0, 1, · · · , T − 1,
(2)

where n is the total number of users in the service area
of the i-th satellite during time slot t, and akij (t) represents
t
the size of the message sent by the user k to fij
in time
k
slot t. Assume that for different k, aij (t) are independent
and identically distributed. Considering the rapidly growing
demand for LEO satellite networks, exemplified by Starlink
serving 1.5 million users, it can be inferred that n will reach
t
several hundred. Therefore, fij
approximately follows the
Gaussian distribution, according to the central limit theorem,
similar to the diffusion approximation in queue theory [34].
The data flow matrix Ft in time slot t is given by


0
fvt1 v2
· · · fvt1 vK
 fvt v
0
· · · fvt2 vK 
 2 1

(3)
Ft =  .
.
..  ,
..
..
 ..
.
. 
fvtK v1

fvtK v2

···

0

where vk refers to the k-th satellite in the V0 . And the total
throughput in time slot t can be represented as Ft m1 , where
∥·∥m1 means the sum of the absolute value of all elements in
the matrix. The Ft of each slot follows the same distribution
during one episode.
III. P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
The routing strategy and the optimization problem for LISLs
scheduling are discussed in this section.
A. Routing Strategy of Data Flow
For traffic routing, when the source and destination nodes
t
set V0 and the corresponding data flows fij
are given, the only

thing that needs to be determined is the traffic distribution
t
of the flows over edges. The ratio of the flow fij
on edge
(u, v) ∈ E is denoted as xij (u, v). Moreover, the following
constraints should be satisfied.
1) The link capacity cannot be exceeded, which can be
expressed as
X
t
fij
· xtij (u, v) ≤ c(u, v), ∀(u, v) ∈ E. (4)
i,j∈V0 ,i̸=j
t
2) For fij
, when it flows through an intermediate node k,
the flow entering and leaving the node should be equal,
which can be described as
X
(xtij (k, m) − xtij (m, k)) = 0, ∀i, j ∈ V0 , i ̸= j,
m∈N (k)

when k ̸= i, k ̸= j,

(5)

t
3) For the source node of fij
, the total data flow must exit,
which can be written as
X
(xtij (i, m) − xtij (m, i)) = 1, ∀i, j ∈ V0 , i ̸= j.
m∈N (i)

(6)
4)

t
The data flow fij
should totally enter the satellite j as

X

(xtij (j, m) − xtij (m, j)) = −1, ∀i, j ∈ V0 , i ̸= j.

m∈N (j)

(7)
However, a routing loop is still possible when the above
constraints are met, for instance, a routing loop without a
source can satisfy all the above constraints, but it is not in line
with the actual situation. In [35], an algorithm constructing a
directed acyclic graph was proposed, while a simpler treatment
is adopted in this paper by adding an additional term as
P
P
t
t
(u,v)∈E
i,j∈V0 ,i̸=j xij (u, v) · fij
,
(8)
Havg =
Ft m1
which means the average hop count of the data flows in satellite network. If the goal is to minimize the target function g,
a large coefficient L can multiply g, and then add with Havg .
As the simulation results in [11], the difference of node delay
plays an important role in different paths. Therefore, in this
paper, the average hop count is reduced to optimize the delay,
and three routing policies are designed as follows.
1) R1 : Minimize the average hop count. Eq. (8) is selected
as the objective function and the aforementioned constraints (4)-(7) are applied, the problem can be written
as
!
P
P
t
t
(u,v)∈E
i,j∈V0 ,i̸=j xij (u, v) · fij
min
,
Ft m1
xtij (u,v)
s.t.(4), (5), (6), (7).

(9)

2) R2 : Minimize the link load. Let z denote the maximum
load of link, which is regarded as the optimization
objective. Another constraint needs to be added to ensure
that the load rate of each link does not exceed z.
Moreover, the routing loop should be avoided by adding

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:55:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: OPTIMIZATION FOR DYNAMIC LISL SCHEDULING WITH ROUTING

the term defined in (8). Therefore, this routing strategy
can be calculated by
!
P
P
t
t
(u,v)∈E
i,j∈V0 ,i̸=j xij (u, v) · fij
,
min L · z +
Ft m1
xtij (u,v)
s.t. (4), (5), (6), (7),
P
t
t
i,j∈V0 ,i̸=j fij · xij (u, v)
c(u, v)

≤ z,

c(u, v)

≤ z,

∀(u, v) ∈ E.

(11)
These constraints and objective functions are all linear, and so
the traffic distribution xtij (u, v) can be obtained easily by the
linear programming tool.
B. Optimization Problem Formulation
When the routing policy R is determined, due to the V0 is
fixed during the current episode, the traffic distribution only
depends on the network topology G(Ed ) and the volume
of data flow Ft , and so the xtij (u, v) can be written as
xtij (u, v, G(Ed ), Ft |V0 , R). Since Ft is a random variable,
a reasonable G(Ed ) is expected to be optimized to reduce the
average hop count and energy consumption. The average hop
count in this case can be written as
H(G(Ed ), Ft |V0 , R)
P
P
=

(u,v)∈E

where β is used to achieve a trade-off between two goals.
When β = 1, the objective function only focuses on the
average hop count, and when β = 0, only the energy
consumption is optimized.
IV. MADRL A LGORITHM FOR DYNAMIC
LISL S S CHEDULING

∀(u, v) ∈ E,

(10)
where L is a large coefficient as mentioned before.
3) R3 : Compromise between average hop count and link
load. Similar to the previous discussion, the problem can
be expressed as
!
P
P
t
t
(u,v)∈E
i,j∈V0 ,i̸=j xij (u, v) · fij
z+
min
,
Ft m1
xtij (u,v)
s.t. (4), (5), (6), (7),
P
t
t
i,j∈V0 ,i̸=j fij · xij (u, v)

2767

t
t
t
i,j∈V0 ,i̸=j xij (u, v, G(Ed ), F |V0 , R) · fij
.
Ft m1

(12)

In this section, the optimization defined in (15) is translated
into a Markov decision process (MDP). Moreover, the MDP is
decomposed into multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
to reduce the complexity, while the deep Q-learning network
(DQN) [36] is adopted to solve the problem. Meanwhile, based
on the characteristics of satellite networks, several methods
are also introduced to reduce communication, storage, and
computation overhead and accelerate convergence.
A. Cooperative MARL for Dynamic Link Scheduling
It is challenging to solve (15) directly, as the feasible region
is discrete and extremely large. However, since V0 is constant
and Ft follows the same distribution within one episode, the
link status in a time slot can provide a reference for the
selection of Ed in subsequent time slots. Therefore, as an
alternative, in the time slot 0 of the current episode, the
satellite network topology remains unchanged from the last
time slot T − 1 of the previous episode, and for each time
slot t, the next time slot dynamic LISLs Edt+1 are optimized
according to the current link state St as
Edt+1 = π(St ),

t = 0, 1, · · · , T − 2,

(16)

where π(·) is the policy that adjusts Edt+1 according to St , and
Edt+1 is added a superscript to represent the dynamic LISLs
in time slot t + 1, which is the same for E t+1 . Therefore,
formula (15) can be reorganized as
max −βEFt+1 [H0 (G(π(St )), Ft+1 |V0 , R)]
π

− (1 − β)P0 (G(π(St ))) , t = 0, 1, · · · , T − 2.

(17)

t

Assuming that F is composed of a large amount of data
streams, and so Ft m1 does not fluctuate much. The term
related to average hop count in the objective function is
rewritten as
H0 (G(Ed ), Ft |V0 , R)
X
X
t
=
xtij (u, v, G(Ed ), Ft |V0 , R) · fij
.

(13)

(u,v)∈E i,j∈V0 ,i̸=j

Meanwhile, energy consumption is directly related to the
number of LISLs, and the energy consumption term is set
as
P0 (G(Ed )) = |Ed | ,

(14)

since the number of fixed LISLs is determined, it is not
counted in it. And the problem can be formulated as

max −βEFt [H0 (G(Ed ), Ft |V0 , R)] − (1 − β)P0 (G(Ed )) ,
Ed ⊂Ω

(15)

Under this strategy, the scheduling of Edt+1 in one episode
is modeled as a sequential decision, and the link state of
the current time slot only depends on the last one, thus
forming an MDP. The MDP can be described with a quintuple
< S, A, P, R, γ >, where S, A, and P represent the set of the
environment state, the action space, and the state transition
probability matrix, respectively, and γ ∈ [0, 1] is the discount
factor. Concretely, in dynamic link scheduling problem, these
variables have the following meanings.
1) State: The topology of the satellite network and the
load of the LISLs in time slot t can be regarded as the
environment state, and can be defined as
 t

s11
st12
· · · st1N
 st21
st22
· · · st2N 


t
S = .
(18)
..
..  ,
..
 ..
.
.
. 
stN 1 stN 2 · · · stN N

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:55:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2768

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 72, NO. 5, MAY 2024

where N is the total number of the satellites, and stuv
can be obtained as

X

f t xt (u, v, G(Edt ), Ft |V0 , R),


 i,j∈V ,i̸=j ij ij
0
stuv =
if(u, v) ∈ E t ,




0,
others.
(19)
2) Action: Considering the whole satellite network as an
agent, the action it takes in the time slot t is the change
to the Ed in the next time slot, therefore the action in
time slot t is given by
At = Edt+1 = π(St ),

t = 0, 1, · · · , T − 2,

(20)

in which At means the action it adopts in time slot t.
3) Reward: The reward function represents the benefits
gained by executing action At in the state St . According
to the optimization target in (17), the reward can be
calculated as
Rt (St , At ) = −β(H0 (G(π(St )), Ft+1 |V0 , R))
− (1 − β)P0 (G(π(St ))), t = 0, 1, · · · , T − 2,

(21)

where Rt denotes the achieved reward after the action At
in the state St . The first term represents the improvement
of average hop count in time slot t + 1, and the second
one is the energy consumption.
However, the MDP described in (17) to (21) has an infinite
state space. In addition, given that At = Edt+1 ⊂ Ω, the action
space is also extensive, making it challenging to optimize
dynamic LISLs of the satellite network as a whole. To address
this issue, a practical approach is to reduce the action space
by decomposing the problem into independent decisions made
by each satellite concerning its own dynamic link selection. In
this context, each satellite in the constellation acts as an agent
and makes decisions based on its own state information. By
considering the decisions of all satellites, the dynamic links
Edt+1 in the next time slot are ultimately determined, thus a
cooperative MARL is formed. Therefore, for each satellite,
environment state S, action A, and reward function R are
adjusted correspondingly as follows.
1) State for satellite i: For i ∈ V in time slot t, select the
satellites in the range of (2a + 1) × (2b + 1) centered
i
on satellite i to form a set Vnear
. The state for satellite
i is defined as
 t

si1 i1
sti1 i2
· · · sti1 iL
 sti i
sti2 i2
· · · sti2 iL 
 21

t
si =  .
(22)
..
..  ,
..
 ..
.
.
. 
stiL i1 stiL i2 · · · stiL iL
i
where the subscript ik denotes the k-th satellite in Vnear
,
t
t
and smn is defined in (19). It is obvious that si is a
submatrix of St . Moreover, as illustrated in Section II-C,
the topology of the two adjacent satellites shows mirror
symmetry, for the mirrored satellites, their state matrices
are flipped left and right after calculating the results
in (22).

2) Action for satellite i: The satellite i can take the action
ati to determine the dynamic LISLs type as
ati = 0, 1, · · · , amax ,

(23)

where ati

= 0 means the satellite determines to make
dynamic LISL inactive, while other options corresponding to each number have been introduced in Section II-C,
thus amax = 7, and similarly, for the mirrored satellites,
these options are also flipped accordingly. Meanwhile,
the dynamic link will be established in the next time slot
only if the satellites at both ends of the link make the
decision to establish it simultaneously.
3) Reward for satellite i: The total objective function is
adopted as the reward function for each agent in [27] and
[31], which is a convenient method. However, in these
works, the number of agents is not large and a single
agent has a large impact on the total reward, which
is not applicable in the case of this paper. With hundreds of satellites in the constellation, a single dynamic
link has little effect on the overall traffic distribution.
Consequently, it may become challenging for the agent
to learn from the rewards of taking actions. Therefore,
it is necessary to split the rewards so that each agent
can intuitively evaluate the benefits of its actions. Since
adding a constant to the objective function does not
affect the result, Eq. (17) can be rewritten as
max −βEFt+1 [H0 (G(π(St )), Ft+1 |V0 , R)
π

− H0 (G(Edt+1 = ), Ft+1 |V0 , R)]

− (1 − β)P0 (G(π(St ))) , t = 0, 1, · · · , T − 2,
(24)
where the added H0 (G(Edt+1 = ), Ft+1 |V0 , R) denotes
the total amount of the load of the LISLs when there is
no established dynamic link. Correspondingly, the global
reward in (21) can be reorganized as
Rt (St , At ) = −β(H0 (G(π(St )), Ft+1 |V0 , R)
− H0 (G(Edt+1 = ), Ft+1 |V0 , R))
− (1 − β)P0 (G(π(St ))),

t = 0, 1, · · · , T − 2.
(25)

Therefore, the impact of the action adopted by each
satellite on global reward in (25) should be investigated. If a satellite does not establish a dynamic link,
it will have no impact on global reward. Conversely,
if a dynamic link is formed, the energy consumption
term in the reward function will increase by 2, since
this LISL will be counted twice in Edt+1 for different
directions. Without considering the influence of other
dynamic LISLs, if a dynamic LISL is established, the
average hop count term in the global reward function
will decrease. Specifically, if a dynamic LISL in modes
1 to 6 is established, this term will decrease by the same
value as the traffic passing through this dynamic link,
since the traffic will take an additional hop to reach the
same destination through the fixed LISLs. For the traffic
passing through the dynamic LISL in mode 7, part of

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:55:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: OPTIMIZATION FOR DYNAMIC LISL SCHEDULING WITH ROUTING

the traffic can be equivalently transmitted through other
fixed LISLs without increasing the number of hops, and
the other part of the traffic needs two more hops, thus
the traffic through the LISL in mode 7 is multiplied by
a factor η. Ultimately, the reward function of satellite i
is expressed as


t+1

0.5 β · (st+1

ij + sji ) − 2(1 − β) ,


t
t


 if j ∈ N (i), (i, j) ∈ π(S ), ai = 1, · · · , 6,
t+1
rit = 0.5 β · η(st+1
(26)
ij + sji ) − 2(1 − β) ,


t
t

if
j
∈
N
(i),
(i,
j)
∈
π(S
),
a
=
7,

i


 0,
others,
where st+1
ij is defined in (19), and each term is multiplied
by 0.5 because a dynamic LISL is counted twice when
the reward is calculated separately for each satellite.
Since the influence of other dynamic LISLs is not
considered, the reward function calculated in (26) tends
to be overestimated when there are a large number
of dynamic links. However, results in the subsequent
section will indicate that there is a strong linear relationship between the sum of the reward functions obtained
by (26) for each satellite and global reward in (25),
which proves that the decomposition method is effective.
B. Deep Q-Learning Network

2769

which are the current network Qi (sti , ati ; θ) and the target
network Qi (sti , ati ; θ − ). In the training period, according to
the sample < sti , ati , rit , st+1
> selected from experience pool,
i
the current value function is calculated as
b ti , ati )
Q(s
= rit + γQi (st+1
, arg max Qi (st+1
, a; θ); θ − ).
i
i
Then, the MSE-based loss function LMSE is expressed as
b ti , ati ) − Q(sti , ati ; θ))2 ,
LMSE = (Q(s

where ϵ denotes the probability of an exploration by the agent.
At the beginning of training, the value of ϵ is set close to 1 to
encourage the agent to explore more, while when the training
is stabilized, ϵ tends to approach 0 to enable the agent to
concentrate on optimizing the existing policy. After the agent
takes action, it goes to the next state st+1
and gets a reward
i
rit , then the resulting experience sample < sti , ati , rit , st+1
>
i
are stored in experience pool, and the latest sample will cover
the earliest one, if the given volume of experience pool is
exceeded.
The network utilizes the sample stored in experience pool to
update the parameters according to Bellman equation, which
is given by
Qi (sti , ati ; θ) = rit + γ max Qi (st+1
, at+1
; θ).
i
i
at+1
i

(28)

In order to avoid an overestimation of Q-value function,
Double DQN [37] adopts two DNNs with the same structure,

(30)

and if the input is in the form of a minibatch, the loss function
is averaged according to the batch size. The parameters of
the current network θ are updated by the adaptive moment
estimation method [38] according to the loss function and
those of the target network θ − are replaced by θ in each
C slots.
The reward obtained by the agent is strongly related to its
current state. When the current surrounding load is heavy,
establishing a dynamic link can generally obtain more rewards
and vice versa. Based on this, the Dueling DQN [39] is
adopted which splits the output into two streams, one for
estimating the state value function V (s), and the other one
for estimating the advantage function A(s, a) of each action
a. As a result, the Q-value function is obtained by
Q(s, a) = V (s) + A(s, a) − Ā(s, a),

For the MARL constructed in the previous subsection,
which operates in a continuous state space with a limited
action space, it is appropriate to utilize a DQN to effectively learn the optimal scheduling policy for the dynamic
LISLs. Each agent, namely a satellite, obtains Q-value function
Qi (sti , ati ; θ), which describes the expected reward of taking
a particular action in a particular state, by the DNN with the
parameters θ. To balance the exploration and exploitation in
DRL, an ϵ-greedy strategy is adopted to determine action ati
chosen by the agent i as

 arg max Q(sti , a; θ), with probability 1-ϵ,
a
ati =
(27)
 random action,
with probability ϵ,

(29)

a

(31)

where Ā(s, a) denotes the average over different a.
C. Framework of the Algorithm
The framework of the MADRL is illustrated in Fig. 4. In
order to account for the limited satellite resources and ensure
the stability of the training with a large number of agents in
the system, the following techniques have been adopted.
1) Compress Sensing for State Information: The state
information sti is transmitted frequently and stored in large
quantities in the experience pool, and this causes a lot of
communication and storage overhead. Therefore, compressing
state information is of great value to reduce the requirements
of the transmission bandwidth and storage capacity, as well as
to cut down the network size.
Since the number of LISLs that each satellite established is
not more than NLISL = 4, the amount of nonzero elements
in each column of sti is significantly smaller than the length
t
L of each column. Therefore, the compressed state esi can be
obtained by
esti = Φ0 sti ,

(32)

where Φ0 is a fixed D × L matrix randomly generated from
the Gaussian distribution, and so the state information is
compressed from L×L to D×L. Furthermore, as CS results in
low information loss and the position of the non-zero elements
t
in sti is known, it is feasible to adopt the esi directly as input to
the neural network with low performance degradation, which
reduces the network parameters. In addition, due to the weak
coherence of Φ0 , the input is equivalent to being normalized,
which also speeds up the convergence of the network.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:55:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2770

Fig. 4.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 72, NO. 5, MAY 2024

The architecture of the MADRL for dynamic LISLs scheduling.

TABLE I
S IMULATION PARAMETERS

2) Network Parameter and Experience Sharing: In cooperative MADRL, the environment encountered by a single
agent is non-stationary due to the changing strategies of other
agents, which poses a challenge to the stability of network
training [40]. To ensure stability and speed up convergence, the

satellite network of homogeneous agents can utilize the same
network parameters, which guarantees that all agents follow
the same policy. Additionally, storing experience samples of
all agents in a global experience pool and sharing them during
training can improve the generalization ability and robustness
of the network, and also reduce the training overhead as well.
The implementation of network parameter and experience
sharing is shown in Fig. 4.
3) Prioritized Experience Replay: Once the number of samples in experience pool Ne exceeds a threshold Ns , samples
are drawn from experience pool to train the DNN. However,
a dynamic LISL is only established when both agents agree
to establish the link, which results in sparse rewards for the
agent at the start of training. Consequently, the experience
pool contains only a few experiences that establish dynamic
LISLs successfully, making it challenging for the network
to efficiently learn useful information. To address this issue,
the prioritized experience replay method [41] is employed to
sample in experience pool during the initial training stage.
Different from the original method in [41], the sampling
probability pi of a sample i is determined by the absolute
value of its reward function as

α
|ri |


, if episode k < kth ,
 PNe
α
j=1 |rj |
pi =
(33)

1


,
others,
Ne
where ri indicates the reward of sample i and α adjusts the priority, making it easier to sample successful LISL establishment
experiences from experience pool in the initial stage, and k and
kth represent the current episode and the threshold episode,
respectively, which means that each sample is collected with
equal probability when the training stabilizes. This method
accelerates the learning of the network by giving priority to
samples with higher absolute values of reward function.
Finally, the detailed description of the MADRL algorithm
for scheduling of dynamic LISLs is shown in Algorithm 1.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:55:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: OPTIMIZATION FOR DYNAMIC LISL SCHEDULING WITH ROUTING

2771

Fig. 5.

The episode reward with β = 0.5 under different routing strategies. (a) Strategy R1 . (b) Strategy R2 . (c) Strategy R3 .

Fig. 6.

The global reward and the sum of agent rewards, β = 0.5. (a) Strategy R1 . (b) Strategy R2 . (c) Strategy R3 .

V. S IMULATION R ESULTS AND P ERFORMANCE A NALYSIS
A. Simulation Parameters

TABLE II
N ETWORK S TRUCTURE

The update of exploration probability ϵ is expressed as

i

1−
, if i ⩽ 450,



500

ϵ = 0.1, if 450 < i ⩽ 800,
(34)


0.01, if 800 < i ⩽ 1000,



0, if i > 1000,
where i is the current episode. The simulation parameters
are summarized in Table I. The structure of the Q-network
is shown in Table II, where the FC layer is an abbreviation
t
of the full-connected layer. The compressed status matrix esi
is expanded into a one-dimensional tensor with length Lin =
D × L. The input tensor is divided into two branches after
passing through the backbone network, one is the advantage
function branch and the other one is the state value function
branch, which are calculated as A(s, a) and V (s), respectively.
Finally, the Q-value function Q(s, a) is given by (31).
B. Performance Analysis
The global reward function obtained in the last time slot of
each episode during the training period with β = 0.5 under
different routing strategies is shown in Fig. 5. It can be seen
that reward curves gradually rise and finally reach convergence

under all routing strategies. The compromise in optimality is
primarily caused by the partitioning of the holistic problem
into independent decisions for each satellite, as well as the
inaccuracies introduced by the division of global reward. The
complexity of addressing the optimization issue for large-scale
constellations holistically is prohibitively high, rendering some
degree of loss inevitable for expeditious problem-solving. In
terms of the latter issue, the effectiveness of reward decomposition is validated in Fig. 6 by comparing the sum of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:55:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2772

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 72, NO. 5, MAY 2024

Fig. 7.

Results with different β, strategy R1 . (a) Global reward. (b) Average hop count. (c) The number of LISLs.

Fig. 8.

Results with different active flows, strategy R1 , β = 0.5. (a) Global reward. (b) Average hop count. (c) The number of LISLs.

agent rewards defined in (26) and global reward in (25). It
is evident that the discrepancy between the sum of the agent
rewards and global reward is not significant across all three
routing strategies. The error is smallest under strategy R1 ,
due to the majority of traffic through the dynamic LISLs
being directed towards reducing hop count, rendering the
analysis above (26) particularly pertinent. Conversely, the
error is most pronounced under strategy R2 , which solely
considers the reduction of the maximum link load, thereby
causing data flow to bypass a longer route to alleviate the
load. The error under strategy R3 falls somewhere in between.
Moreover, there is a strong correlation between the sum of
agent rewards and global reward among the three strategies,
with a correlation coefficient exceeding 0.98. Furthermore,
other DRL methods utilizing global reward as a target struggle
to achieve convergence in this scenario involving numerous
agents. Consequently, the proposed method strikes a balance
between the optimality loss and convergence.
The effectiveness of the proposed method is validated by
contrasting it with other algorithms. (1) Dynamic LISLs, the
proposed method. (2) T-shaped LISLs, consisting solely of
the fixed T-shaped LISLs depicted in Fig. 2(b), without any
dynamic LISLs. (3) Fixed LISLs, a configuration with four
fixed LISLs as Fig. 2(a). (4) Random LISLs, consisting of
T-shaped fixed LISLs and dynamic LISLs established randomly. The performance is compared across various scenarios.

1) Results With Different β: These methods were subjected
to tests under varying β values, given the routing strategy
R1 . Global rewards defined in (25) are illustrated in Fig. 7(a).
Average hop count and the number of LISLs of the four
methods are shown in Fig. 7(b) and Fig. 7(c), respectively.
Given that (i, j) ∈ E implies (j, i) ∈ E, total LISLs count is
calculated as |E|/2. From global reward perspective, the proposed method consistently outperforms the others, regardless
of the β value. T-shaped LISLs, serving as the benchmark
defined in (25), maintain a constant global reward of zero.
Conversely, due to the excessive number of established LISLs,
fixed LISLs method, despite a reduction in its average hop
count, only surpasses T-shaped LISLs in global reward when
β is significantly large. This observation corroborates the
assertion in [9] regarding the redundancy of the configuration
with four fixed LISLs. The amount of LISLs and average
hop count of random LISLs fall between those of T-shaped
LISLs and fixed LISLs. Moreover, as β increases, the proposed
method exhibits a gradual slowdown in the reduction of
average hop count and increase in LISL count. This suggests
a diminishing marginal utility in the addition of dynamic links
for the reduction of average hop count.
2) Performance in Different Active Flow Ratio: During the
model training, it is assumed that all data flows among nodes in
V0 are active. However, traffic activity experiences fluctuations
throughout the day in reality, with reduced traffic during rest

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:55:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: OPTIMIZATION FOR DYNAMIC LISL SCHEDULING WITH ROUTING

Algorithm 1 The MADRL for the Scheduling of Dynamic
LISLs
Initialize:
1: Initialize routing policy R.
2: Initialize the hot spot set V h and the satellite network
topology with Ed = .
3: Initialize the current network and target network with
random parameter, θ = θ − .
4: Initialize the sensing matrix Φ0 from a Gaussian
distribution.
5: Initialize the global experience pool Q and the number of
samples Ne = 0.
6: Initialize the number of episodes EP ISODE_N U M .
Training:
7: for episode k = 1 to EP ISODE_N U M do
8:
Generate the source and destination nodes set V0 from
V h and the traffic flow F0 .
9:
Execute the routing policy R.
10:
for slot t = 0 to T − 2 do
11:
for agent i = 1 to N do
12:
Each agent i obtains the environment state sti .
t
13:
Compress the state information esi ← Φ0 sti .
t
14:
Input the esi to the current network, and select
the action ati with the ϵ-greedy strategy according
to (27).
15:
Execute the action ati .
16:
end for
17:
Generate the traffic flow Ft+1 and execute the routing
policy R.
18:
for agent i = 1 to N do
19:
Calculate the reward rit according to (26).
t+1
←
20:
Obtain the state in next slot st+1
and esi
i
t+1
Φ0 si .
t
t+1
21:
Store the experience sample< esi , ati , rit ,esi
>
into global experience pool D and update Ne .
22:
end for
23:
if Ne > Ns then
t+1
t
24:
Sample the experience < esj , atj , rjt ,esj > from D
according to (33).
25:
Calculate the loss function by (30).
26:
Update the parameter of the current network θ and
share with all the agents.
27:
end if
28:
end for
29:
Update the parameter of target network with θ − ← θ
each C slots.
30: end for

periods and increased data during work periods. Consequently,
tests are predicated on the assumption that only a certain
percentage of data flows remain active. Test results of the
four methods under routing policy R1 with β = 0.5 are
presented in Fig. 8. Results suggest that with the rise in the
proportion of active data flows, the number of LISLs in the
proposed method incrementally ascends, while the average
hop count initially descends and then slightly ascends. This is
attributable to the fact that an increase in the number of links

2773

Fig. 9.
The performance over multiple slots, β = 0.5, strategy R1 .
(a) Average hop count. (b) The number of LISLs.

can effectively reduce the average hop count when the load is
low. However, as the traffic load intensifies further, some links
become fully loaded, leading to a corresponding increase in
average hop count. Despite this, the overall performance of the
proposed method remains stable and significantly outperforms
other three methods.
3) Performance Over Multiple Slots: Due to the continuous
movement of satellites, access points V0 are also changing
among different episodes. Performance under routing strategy
R1 with β = 0.5 is tested over 50 continuous time slots,
i.e., five episodes. Results are shown in Fig. 9, with each
episode divided by a dashed line. Average hop count for
the four methods is shown in Fig. 9(a). At the first slot
of each episode, average hop count of the proposed method
increases significantly because the link scheduling is still based
on the traffic load of the previous episode. However, it still
outperforms other methods and can quickly reach a steady
state. The number of LISLs of the four methods and the switch
number of dynamic LISLs are shown in Fig. 9(b). It can be
seen that the link switching will peak at the second time slot
of each episode because the scheduling in this slot is the first
based on the current episode information, and then the number
of link switches rapidly decreases. In summary, the proposed
method can quickly adapt to the changes in traffic access
points caused by satellite movement.
4) Results Under Different Routing Strategy: In order to
verify the effectiveness of the proposed method under different routing strategies, a simulation is performed among
50 episodes under three routing strategies with β = 0.5. The
network snapshots at the end of each episode are shown in
Fig. 10, and the numerical results are listed in Table III.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:55:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2774

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 72, NO. 5, MAY 2024

three routing strategies by about 15% compared with fixed
LISLs. In addition, it can be observed that the number of
established LISLs varies significantly under different routing
policies. Among three routing strategies, R1 , which focuses
solely on the average hop count, has the fewest dynamic
LISLs. R2 , which focuses exclusively on link load, has the
most dynamic links, and R3 lies somewhere in between the
two. The reason is that when only the average hop count is
considered, the delay can be reduced by establishing several
critical paths. On the other hand, when the link load is taken
into account, the load must be distributed by establishing more
links.
C. Implementation and Complexity Analysis

Fig. 10. The snapshot of the satellite network, β = 0.5. (a) Strategy R1 .
(b) Strategy R2 . (c) Strategy R3 .

TABLE III
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON B ETWEEN F IXED
LISLS AND DYNAMIC LISLS

The results demonstrate that the proposed method can
effectively reduce the average hop count and the number of
LISLs under various strategies. The average delay can be
reduced by about two hops, and a strong correlation exists
between the average hop count with dynamic LISLs and
that of fixed LISLs. Moreover, the average hop count gap
between three routing strategies is increased after dynamic
link scheduling, which is attributed to the detour of data flows
under strategy R2 and R3 . In terms of the amount of LISLs,
the proposed method reduces the amount of LISLs under all

1) Practical Implementation: During the training process
of DRL, frequent data transmission is required. The delay
requirement for transmission of LEO satellite state information
and DNN training is not stringent, since these processes can
be executed concurrently with the LISL scheduling. Therefore,
a practical implementation is to utilize a GEO satellite as data
storage and training center, while each LEO satellite makes
decisions with its current parameters. Two additional GEO
satellites are required to act as relays and collect information
from LEO satellites within their coverage areas due to the
limited coverage of single GEO satellite. The data center GEO
satellite receives information directly from the LEO satellites
within its coverage area, as well as relayed information from
the other two GEO satellites, thereby forming a global experience pool, and updating the DNN parameters accordingly. The
updated model parameters are broadcasted to LEO satellites in
a similar manner. The longest path from the LEO satellite to
the data center GEO satellite requires passing through a relay
GEO satellite with a maximum round-trip time of 629 ms.
This is adequate to complete the reception of LEO satellite
state information and model parameter updates within a time
slot.
2) Computational Complexity: In the MADRL algorithm,
most computations are associated with the calculation of
DNNs. The computational complexity of the FC layer directly
correlates
its parameter count, which can be calculated as
PLnum with
in
(L
×
Lout
+ Lout
i
i
i ), where Lnum denotes the numi=1
out
ber of layers in DNN, and Lin
represent the input
i and Li
and output size of the i-th layer, respectively.
PLnumThein computational complexity can be estimated as O( i=1
Li × Lout
i ).
Therefore, utilizing compressed samples as inputs reduces the
computational overhead to 20% of using original samples as
inputs, and also requires less memory. Additionally, the DNN
adopted in this paper necessitates fewer than 106 floating-point
multiplications, which can be calculated within 1 ms with the
specialized hardware.
3) Communication and Storage Overhead: During time slot
t + 1, satellite i ∈ V uploads information from the previous
slot, including state sti (10×81 float32 matrix), action ati (onebyte value), and reward rit (float32 number), resulting in a
transmission of 3,245 B per time slot. Each relay GEO satellite
is responsible for relaying data from Nrelay = 240 LEO
satellites it covers, leading to relay 760.55 KB per time slot.
For the experience pool on the data center GEO satellite, each

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:55:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: OPTIMIZATION FOR DYNAMIC LISL SCHEDULING WITH ROUTING

Fig. 11.

2775

The antenna gain pattern introduced in [42] and [43].

experience sample is formatted as <sti , ati , rit , st+1
i >, requiring
6485 B. With not more than 106 samples, it necessitates
storage of 6.04 GB. The DNN parameters are saved in float16
format, and thus GEO satellites need to broadcast 1.46 MB
when the model is updated. Therefore, the communication
cost during the training of DNN for the satellite network is
acceptable.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, a dynamic LISLs scheduling algorithm combined with a specific route strategy is proposed. A link mode
consists of three fixed LISLs and one LISL is investigated
and verified, which fully realizes the potential of long-distance
communication by space-borne laser terminal. The optimization objective is constructed by a tradeoff between establishing
dynamic links to reduce hops and shutting down idle laser
terminals to minimize the energy consumption associated with
the closed-loop control and then transformed into an MDP. The
complexity of the holistic optimization problem is significantly
reduced by decomposing it into independent decisions for
each satellite. The convergence of the algorithm is ensured by
introducing DNN, prioritized experience replay, and sharing
of network parameters and experience pool. Meanwhile, the
CS is used to compress the link state information, which
effectively reduces the communication, storage, and computing overhead. Finally, the simulation results show that the
proposed algorithm can significantly decrease the average
delay by about two hops and energy consumption of satellite
networks by around 15% under various routing strategies after
offline training without additional hardware costs.
A PPENDIX A
C ALCULATION OF S PATIAL PARAMETERS
The laser terminal parameters in [4] and the antenna gain
described in [42] and [43], as shown in Fig. 11, are employed
to validate the feasibility of establishing dynamic LISLs and to
evaluate potential interference with the fixed LISLs. Therefore,
the spatial parameters of dynamic LISLs necessitate to be
calculated first.
As shown in Fig. 12, the angle between the two OPs is Ω,
and the inclination angle is δ. The phase angle of the satellite’s
current position in OP, which can be calculated with the

Fig. 12. The schematic diagram of the geometric relationship between two
satellites.

ascending node of the OP as the starting point, is represented
by ϕ. For simplicity, the line connecting the ascending node
and the descending node of one of the OPs is taken as the
x-axis. The vector position of S1 is calculated as


cos(ϕ1 )
(35)
S1 = R sin(ϕ1 ) cos(δ) ,
sin(ϕ1 ) sin(δ)
and that of S2 is given by


cos(ϕ2 ) cos(Ω) − sin(ϕ2 ) cos(δ) sin(Ω)
S2 = R cos(ϕ2 ) sin(Ω) + sin(ϕ1 ) cos(δ) cos(Ω) , (36)
sin(ϕ2 ) sin(δ)
where ϕ1 and ϕ2 indicate the orbit phase angle of S1 and
S2 , respectively, and R = 7, 587 km indicates the radius of
the orbit. Therefore, the pointing vector from S1 to S2 can be
represented as S2 −S1 , and the communication distance can be
calculated as ∥S2 − S1 ∥2 . To obtain the azimuth and elevation
angles of the terminal, a coordinate is established with S1 as
the reference frame, and the unit vectors in three orthogonal
directions are given by

T

ux = (− sin(ϕ1 ), cos(ϕ1 ) cos(δ), cos(ϕ1 ) sin(δ)) ,
(37)
uy = (0, − sin(δ), cos(δ))T ,


T
uz = (cos(ϕ1 ), sin(ϕ1 ) cos(δ), sin(ϕ1 ) sin(δ)) .
Therefore, the elevation angle ϵ can be calculated as
(S2 − S1 )T uz
), (38)
((S2 − S1 )T ux )2 + ((S2 − S1 )T uy )2

ϵ = tan−1 ( p

and the azimuth angle α can be obtained as

(S2 − S1 )T uy


),
if (S2 − S1 )T ux > 0,
 tan−1 (
(S2 − S1 )T ux
α=
(S2 − S1 )T uy


 tan−1 (
) + π, others.
(S2 − S1 )T ux
(39)
The communication distance does not exceed 4,000 km
according to Fig. 13(a), while the beam pointing range is

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:55:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2776

Fig. 13.
The results for distance and angle range. (a) Communication
distance. (b) Elevation angle and azimuth angle.

shown in Fig. 13(b), the range of elevation angle is between
-12◦ and 0◦ , within the steering range of the terminal in [4].
For the azimuth angle, there is a gap of 17.90◦ between the
azimuth range of each link, which can meet the limits of the
terminal, whose pointing blind zone range is 10◦ .
Since the altitudes of the OPs in the constellation are the
same, the satellites have identical angular velocities and can
be given by
r
GM
ω=
,
(40)
R3
where G is the gravitational constant and M represents the
mass of the Earth. Thus, the difference ∆ϕ between ϕ1 and
ϕ2 is constant, therefore, after substituting ϕ2 = ϕ1 + ∆ϕ
into (38) and (39), ϕ1 is the only time-varying factor in ϵ and
α. As a result, the slew rate of the azimuth angle and elevation
angle can be calculated as

dϵ
dϵ dϕ


=
ω,
ωϵ =
dϕ dt
dϕ
(41)
dα dϕ
dα


ωα =
=
ω,
dϕ dt
dϕ
where ωϵ and ωα represent the slew rate of elevation angle
and azimuth angle, respectively. The results indicate that the
steering rate can also meet the requirements, as shown in
Fig. 14.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 72, NO. 5, MAY 2024

Fig. 14.
The results for the angle steering rate. (a) Elevation angle.
(b) Azimuth angle.

A PPENDIX B
A NALYSIS OF I NTERFERENCE B ETWEEN DYNAMIC
LISL S AND F IXED LISL S
Given the close direction of the laser beam, the potential
interference between dynamic intra-OP LISLs and fixed intraOP LISLs should be considered. As determined in [43], the
signal-to-interference ratio, in this case, is primarily dependent
on the difference of the path loss, and the transmit/receive
antenna gain. The distance between the two receivers is negligible compared to the transmission distance of the laser beams,
and so the transmit antennas can be assumed to be aligned.
Regarding the receiving terminal, the pointing vectors of fixed
LISLs can be calculated with the same method as mentioned
above. Subsequently, the angular difference between the fixed
LISLs and dynamic LISLs at the receiver can be obtained
by the inner product. Assuming a perfect alignment of the
beams, the calculated minimum angular separation between
fixed LISLs and dynamic LISLs is 1.13◦ . As shown in Fig. 11,
the antenna gain at the receiving end in this scenario is below
0 dBi, significantly lower than the maximum gain of 104 dBi
with beam alignment, which is attributed to the extremely
narrow laser beam width of tens of microradians.
Moreover, compared to the substantial reduction in receive
gain, the difference in path loss has a negligible effect on
received power. Thus, the interference from dynamic LISLs
to fixed LISLs can be considered negligible based on the
preceding discussions.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:55:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: OPTIMIZATION FOR DYNAMIC LISL SCHEDULING WITH ROUTING

R EFERENCES
[1] G. Wang, F. Yang, S. Jian, and Z. Han, “Multi-agent deep reinforcement
learning for dynamic laser inter-satellite link scheduling,” in Proc.
IEEE Global Commun. Conf. (Globecom), Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia,
Dec. 2023, pp. 5757–5762.
[2] X. Zhu and C. Jiang, “Integrated satellite-terrestrial networks toward
6G: Architectures, applications, and challenges,” IEEE Internet Things
J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 437–461, Jan. 2022.
[3] Y. Su, Y. Liu, Y. Zhou, J. Yuan, H. Cao, and J. Shi, “Broadband LEO
satellite communications: Architectures and key technologies,” IEEE
Wireless Commun., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 55–61, Apr. 2019.
[4] C. Carrizo, M. Knapek, J. Horwath, D. D. Gonzalez, and P. Cornwell,
“Optical inter-satellite link terminals for next generation satellite constellations,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 11272, pp. 8–18, Mar. 2020.
[5] I. del Portillo, B. G. Cameron, and E. F. Crawley, “A technical
comparison of three low Earth orbit satellite constellation systems to
provide global broadband,” Acta Astronautica, vol. 159, pp. 123–135,
Jun. 2019.
[6] M. Handley, “Delay is not an option: Low latency routing in space,”
in Proc. 17th ACM Workshop Hot Topics Netw., Redmond, WA, USA,
Nov. 2018, pp. 85–91.
[7] A. Grover and A. Sheetal, “A 2 × 40 Gbps mode division multiplexing based inter-satellite optical wireless communication (IsOWC)
system,” Wireless Pers. Commun., vol. 114, no. 3, pp. 2449–2460,
May 2020.
[8] Y. Yang, M. Xu, D. Wang, and Y. Wang, “Towards energy-efficient
routing in satellite networks,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 34,
no. 12, pp. 3869–3886, Dec. 2016.
[9] W. Wang, Y. Zhao, Y. Zhang, X. He, Y. Liu, and J. Zhang, “Intersatellite
laser link planning for reliable topology design in optical satellite networks: A networking perspective,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag.,
vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 2612–2624, Sep. 2022.
[10] A. U. Chaudhry and H. Yanikomeroglu, “Laser intersatellite links in a
starlink constellation: A classification and analysis,” IEEE Veh. Technol.
Mag., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 48–56, Jun. 2021.
[11] A. U. Chaudhry and H. Yanikomeroglu, “Temporary laser inter-satellite
links in free-space optical satellite networks,” IEEE Open J. Commun.
Soc., vol. 3, pp. 1413–1427, 2022.
[12] Q. Chen, G. Giambene, L. Yang, C. Fan, and X. Chen, “Analysis of inter-satellite link paths for LEO mega-constellation networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70, no. 3, pp. 2743–2755,
Mar. 2021.
[13] Q. Wang, D. O. Wu, and P. Fan, “Delay-constrained optimal link
scheduling in wireless sensor networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
vol. 59, no. 9, pp. 4564–4577, Nov. 2010.
[14] J. Chen and Z. Wang, “Coordination game theory-based adaptive
topology control for hybrid VLC/RF VANET,” IEEE Trans. Commun.,
vol. 69, no. 8, pp. 5312–5324, Aug. 2021.
[15] K. Yu, J. Yu, X. Cheng, D. Yu, and A. Dong, “Efficient link scheduling
solutions for the Internet of Things under Rayleigh fading,” IEEE/ACM
Trans. Netw., vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 2508–2521, Dec. 2021.
[16] C. Bao, D. Zhou, M. Sheng, Y. Shi, and J. Li, “Resource scheduling
in satellite networks: A sparse representation based machine learning approach,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM),
Madrid, Spain, Dec. 2021, pp. 01–06.
[17] D. L. Donoho, “Compressed sensing,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52,
no. 4, pp. 1289–1306, Apr. 2006.
[18] W. Chengzhuo, L. Suyang, G. Xiye, and Y. Jun, “Dynamic optimization
of laser inter-satellite link network topology based on genetic algorithm,”
in Proc. 14th IEEE Int. Conf. Electron. Meas. Instrum. (ICEMI),
Chengdu, China, Nov. 2019, pp. 1331–1342.
[19] J. Huang, Y. Su, W. Liu, and F. Wang, “Optimization design of
inter-satellite link (ISL) assignment parameters in GNSS based on
genetic algorithm,” Adv. Space Res., vol. 60, no. 12, pp. 2574–2580,
Dec. 2017.
[20] I. Leyva-Mayorga, B. Soret, and P. Popovski, “Inter-plane inter-satellite
connectivity in dense LEO constellations,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 3430–3443, Jun. 2021.
[21] Y. Lu et al., “Enhancing transmission efficiency of mega-constellation
LEO satellite networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 71, no. 12,
pp. 13210–13225, Dec. 2022.
[22] Z. Tang, Z. Feng, W. Han, W. Yu, B. Zhao, and C. Wu, “Improving
the snapshot routing performance through reassigning the inter-satellite
links,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM
WKSHPS), Hong Kong, Apr. 2015, pp. 97–98.

2777

[23] R. Wang, W. Zhu, R. Ma, Y. Zhang, G. Liu, and W. Kang,
“Inter-satellite link scheduling and power allocation method for
satellite networks,” Wireless Netw., vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 1–12,
Mar. 2023.
[24] O. Kondrateva, H. Döbler, H. Sparka, A. Freimann, B. Scheuermann,
and K. Schilling, “Throughput-optimal joint routing and scheduling for low-Earth-orbit satellite networks,” in Proc. 14th Annu.
Conf. Wireless On-Demand Netw. Syst. Services (WONS), Feb. 2018,
pp. 59–66.
[25] Y. Qi, L. Yang, C. Pan, C. Chi, and Q. Huang, “A flexible topology
reconstruction strategy based on deep Q-learning for balance performance and efficiency of stins,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manag., vol. 20,
no. 2, pp. 1051–1064, Jun. 2023.
[26] R. Zhang, J. Deng, Q. Liu, X. Xie, Q. Gong, and C. Zhu, “FlyLISL:
Traffic balance awared routing for large-scale mixed-reality telepresence
over reconfigurable mega-constellation,” in Proc. IEEE 42nd Int. Conf.
Distrib. Comput. Syst. Workshops (ICDCSW), Bologna, Italy, Jul. 2022,
pp. 260–265.
[27] Z. Lin, Z. Ni, L. Kuang, C. Jiang, and Z. Huang, “Dynamic beam pattern
and bandwidth allocation based on multi-agent deep reinforcement
learning for beam hopping satellite systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
vol. 71, no. 4, pp. 3917–3930, Apr. 2022.
[28] Y. He, B. Sheng, H. Yin, D. Yan, and Y. Zhang, “Multi-objective
deep reinforcement learning based time-frequency resource allocation
for multi-beam satellite communications,” China Commun., vol. 19,
no. 1, pp. 77–91, Jan. 2022.
[29] P. Zuo, C. Wang, Z. Yao, S. Hou, and H. Jiang, “An intelligent routing
algorithm for LEO satellites based on deep reinforcement learning,”
in Proc. IEEE 94th Veh. Technol. Conf. (VTC-Fall), Helsinki, Finland,
Sep. 2021, pp. 1–5.
[30] K.-C. Tsai, L. Fan, L.-C. Wang, R. Lent, and Z. Han, “Multi-commodity
flow routing for large-scale LEO satellite networks using deep reinforcement learning,” in Proc. IEEE Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf. (WCNC),
New Orleans, LA, USA, Apr. 2022, pp. 626–631.
[31] J. Pi, Y. Ran, H. Wang, Y. Zhao, R. Zhao, and J. Luo, “Dynamic
planning of inter-plane inter-satellite links in LEO satellite networks,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Seoul, (South) Korea, May 2022,
pp. 3070–3075.
[32] C. Jiang and X. Zhu, “Reinforcement learning based capacity management in multi-layer satellite networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,
vol. 19, no. 7, pp. 4685–4699, Jul. 2020.
[33] O. Kondrateva, B. Scheuermann, and S. Dietzel, “Scalable flow optimization for small satellite networks using benders decomposition,” in
Proc. IEEE 23rd Int. Symp. World Wireless, Mobile Multimedia Netw.
(WoWMoM), Belfast, U.K., Jun. 2022, pp. 221–230.
[34] C. Newell, Applications of Queueing Theory, vol. 4. Berlin, Germany:
Springer, 2013.
[35] O. Hope and E. Yoneki, “GDDR: GNN-based data-driven routing,” in
Proc. IEEE 41st Int. Conf. Distrib. Comput. Syst. (ICDCS), Washington,
DC, USA, Jul. 2021, pp. 517–527.
[36] V. Mnih et al., “Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning,” Nature, vol. 518, pp. 529–533, Feb. 2015.
[37] H. V. Hasselt, A. Guez, and D. Silver, “Deep reinforcement learning with
double Q-learning,” in Proc. 30th AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Phoenix, AZ,
USA, Feb. 2016, pp. 2094–2100.
[38] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., San Diego, CA, USA, May 2015,
pp. 1–15.
[39] Z. Wang, T. Schaul, M. Hessel, H. van Hasselt, M. Lanctot, and
N. de Freitas, “Dueling network architectures for deep reinforcement
learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), New York, NY,
USA, Jun. 2016, pp. 1995–2003.
[40] J. K. Gupta, M. Egorov, and M. J. Kochenderfer, “Cooperative
multi-agent control using deep reinforcement learning,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Auto. Agents Multiagent Syst., Sao Paulo, Brazil, May 2017,
pp. 66–83.
[41] T. Schaul, J. Quan, I. Antonoglou, and D. Silver, “Prioritized experience
replay,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., San Juan, Puerto Rico,
May 2016, pp. 1–21.
[42] Technical and Operational Characteristics of Interplanetary and DeepSpace Systems Operating in the Space-to-Earth Direction Around 283
Thz, ITU-R Recommendation Standard 1742, Int. Telecommun. Union,
2006.
[43] Technical and Operational Characteristics of Space-to-Space Telecommunication Systems Operating Around 354 Thz and 366 Thz, ITU-R
Recommendation Standard 1805, Int. Telecommun. Union, 2007.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:55:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2778

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 72, NO. 5, MAY 2024

Guanhua Wang received the B.S. degree from
the Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China, in 2021, where he
is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the
Broadband Multimedia Transmission Technology
Research Team. His research interests include optical satellite networks and machine learning for
communication.

Fang Yang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.S.E. and Ph.D. degrees in electronic engineering from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in
2005 and 2009, respectively. He is currently an
Associate Professor with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University. He has
published over 180 peer-reviewed journal articles
and conference papers. He holds over 50 Chinese
patents and two PCT patents. His research interests include power line communication, visible
light communication, and digital television terrestrial
broadcasting. He is a fellow of IET. He received the IEEE Scott Helt Memorial
Award (Best Paper Award from IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON B ROADCASTING)
in 2015.

Jian Song (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.Eng.
and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 1990 and
1995, respectively. He is currently with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, and also with the Shenzhen International
Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen,
China. He has been working in quite different areas
of fiber-optic, satellite and wireless communications,
as well as the power-line communications. He has
published more than 300 peer-reviewed journal articles and conference papers. He holds two U.S. and more than 80 Chinese
patents. His current research interests include digital broadcasting, network
convergence, and visible light communications. He is a fellow of IET.

Zhu Han received the B.S. degree in electronic
engineering from Tsinghua University in 1997 and
the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical and computer engineering from the University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA, in 1999 and 2003,
respectively.
From 2000 to 2002, he was a Research and
Development Engineer with JDSU, Germantown,
MD, USA. From 2003 to 2006, he was a
Research Associate with the University of Maryland.
From 2006 to 2008, he was an Assistant Professor
with Boise State University, Boise, ID, USA. He is currently a John and
Rebecca Moores Professor with the Electrical and Computer Engineering
Department as well as the Computer Science Department, University of
Houston, Houston, TX, USA. His main research targets on the novel gametheory-related concepts critical to enabling efficient and distributive use
of wireless networks with limited resources. His research interests include
wireless resource allocation and management, wireless communications and
networking, quantum computing, data science, smart grids, carbon neutralization, security, and privacy. He has been an AAAS Fellow since 2019 and
an ACM Distinguished Member since 2019. He received the NSF Career
Award in 2010, the Fred W. Ellersick Prize of the IEEE Communication
Society in 2011, the EURASIP Best Paper Award for the Journal on Advances
in Signal Processing in 2015, the IEEE Leonard G. Abraham Prize in the
field of communications systems (Best Paper Award from IEEE J OURNAL
ON S ELECTED A REAS IN C OMMUNICATIONS ) in 2016, the IEEE Vehicular
Technology Society 2022 Best Land Transportation Paper Award, and several
best paper awards in IEEE conferences. He is also the Winner of the 2021
IEEE Kiyo Tomiyasu Award (the IEEE Field Award), for outstanding early
to mid-career contributions to technologies holding the promise of innovative
applications, with the following citation: “for contributions to game theory
and distributed management of autonomous communication networks.” He
was an IEEE Communications Society Distinguished Lecturer from 2015 to
2018 and an ACM Distinguished Speaker from 2022 to 2025. Since 2017,
he has been a 1% Highly Cited Researcher according to Web of Science.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:55:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

