890

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 4, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2020

E-CGR: Energy-Aware Contact Graph Routing
Over Nanosatellite Networks
Mario Marchese , Senior Member, IEEE, and Fabio Patrone

Abstract—Satellite constellations are envisioned as meaningful
transport networks to forward data throughout the world, both as
a solution for areas where there are no other telecommunication
infrastructures or as a backup solution to support the terrestrial
network. Low Earth Orbit (LEO) satellites are the most appealing for this purpose due to the achievable performance keeping
low design and deployment costs. Mega-constellation made of
thousands of small LEO satellites are planned to be employed
to cover the entire Earth’s surface. However, smaller is the size
and weight of satellites, higher are the technological challenges
and stricter are the hardware constraints which affect the data
forwarding process and have to be taken into account. Energy is
one of them. Telecommunication hardware energy consumption
is considerable, especially in case of high traffic volumes, while
energy storage capacity and battery recharge rate are limited due
to the small battery size and solar panel surface area, respectively. In this paper, we propose a novel energy-aware routing
algorithm based on the Contact Graph Routing (CGR) called
E-CGR. E-CGR exploits static and known a priori information
about contacts to compute routing paths from sources to destinations which are then “validated” and “confirmed” from the
energy viewpoint.
Index Terms—DTN, nanosatellite communications, remote
areas connection, satellite networks.

I. I NTRODUCTION
WARENESS of nanosatellites’ energy capacity is crucial
for the practical development of satellite communication
(SatCom) networks. New classes of small satellites, called
micro-, nano-, and pico-satellites, are increasingly catching our
attention [1]. Their size and, consequently, cost are decreasing, allowing more entities to gain access to space. These small
Low Earth Orbit (LEO) satellites are mainly designed for specific and short-term missions and are appealing due to their
low cost and fast design time. Their wide deployment can also
foster the foreseen integration between satellite networks and
terrestrial infrastructures as part of an overall communication
network in the forthcoming next generation of mobile communications (5G). Pursuing this opportunity, some industries are
studying and planning the deployment of swarms or constellations of small satellites for specific application scenarios. For
example, Eutelsat is planning to deploy a LEO nanosatellite

A

Manuscript received February 13, 2019; revised August 31, 2019
and December 24, 2019; accepted March 1, 2020. Date of publication
March 4, 2020; date of current version August 19, 2020. The associate editor
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was
E. Ayanoglu. (Corresponding author: Fabio Patrone.)
The authors are with the Department of Electrical, Electronics
and Telecommunications Engineering, and Naval Architecture (DITEN),
University of Genoa, 16145 Genoa, Italy (e-mail: mario.marchese@unige.it;
f.patrone@edu.unige.it).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGCN.2020.2978296

constellation called Eutelsat LEO for Objects (ELO) dedicated
to the Internet of Things (IoT) applications [2]. In this futuristic and realistic vision, satellites will forward data from one
area to another acting as “routers in space”, helping increase
coverage, reliability, and availability, which are important 5G
Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) [3]. However, there are different constraints which hinder the satellite operations, due to
the more challenging environment, the physical unreachability after deployment, and the peculiar used technology. Some
specific constraints are stricter as the satellite size decreases,
such as data storage capacity and available energy. Energy
awareness is crucial for the practical development of SatCom
networks in order to guarantee a minimum performance level.
Data transmission and reception require an amount of energy
which considerably impacts the satellite energy budget and
has to be properly allocated [4]. Energy-aware communication
strategies can contribute to increase throughput and satellite
lifetime [5].
Possible routing paths between sources and destinations
over satellite networks may include links which are not all
active at the same time. Small LEO satellites may not be able
to transmit data for long times due to the lack of connectivity with ground stations or to missing inter-satellite links.
Besides, a satellite-terrestrial network is heterogeneous and
the involved links are often based on different technologies
and communication protocols, such as standard terrestrial protocols (TCP/UDP, IP, . . .) or satellite-dedicated ones [6]. To
tackle these two aspects, intermediate nodes (both satellites
and ground stations) must have the ability to store data in
their buffers for long times and communicate through heterogeneous network portions. This aim can be achieved by
employing the Delay and Disruption Tolerant Networking
(DTN) paradigm [7] that introduces an overlay layer, called
Bundle Layer (BL), between application and lower layers and
implements a protocol, called Bundle Protocol (BP) [8]. Nodes
equipped with DTN can store data until the next transmission
link (called contact in the DTN environment) is available,
so increasing the robustness against predictable and unpredictable link disruptions and long delays, and can also act
as Relay Nodes to join heterogeneous portions [9]. On the
other hand, small satellites have limited energy storage capacity and recharge rate, if compared to standard LEO satellites,
which can hinder the transmission of stored data for long
time intervals. Smart routing strategies which help reduce data
delivery time and take into consideration the strict resource
constraints are crucial to allow users to receive data under
given Quality of Service (QoS) requirements.

c 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
2473-2400 
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 20:00:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MARCHESE AND PATRONE: ENERGY-AWARE CONTACT GRAPH ROUTING OVER NANOSATELLITE NETWORKS

We propose an energy-aware routing algorithm for
DTN-based nanosatellite networks which allows better management of the nanosatellites’ available energy and assures
continuous functionality with an improvement in performance.
The proposed algorithm, called E-CGR, is based on the
Contact Graph Routing (CGR) algorithm [10], widely
employed in DTN networks where there is an a priori knowledge about future contacts among nodes, as typical in satellite
networks [9]. E-CGR allows satellites to upload data packets
only if they will be able to download them to their next hops,
i.e., only if the estimated values of satellite available energy
in the time instant when they have to forward the data are
greater than the energy required for the transmission.
The paper is structured as follows: possible solutions to
the routing challenge in satellite networks focusing on energy
aspects and DTN paradigm are provided in Section II. The
reference DTN-based nanosatellite scenario and network architecture are described in Section III, followed by a detailed
description of the considered satellite energy model and of
the proposed energy-aware routing algorithm (E-CGR) in
Section IV. Section V includes some details about the implemented simulation platforms, the performance analysis carried
out to quantify the improved performance of E-CGR compared
to the standard CGR, to assess the computational complexity and time of the proposed algorithm, and to test how the
obtained performance are affected by the satellite’s available
energy estimation. Conclusions are drawn in Section VI.
II. R ELATED W ORKS
A. Energy-Efficient Routing in Satellite Networks
Since satellites have to operate in a very challenging environment and are almost unreachable after deployment, all
satellite’s subsystems have to be designed to keep operating
for a long time (years) without physical maintenance. As a
consequence, available resources have to be efficiently managed because are limited, irreplaceable, or slowly rechargeable.
Energy is one of these resources and its consumption in
telecommunication hardware components is very critical in
most cases. For this reason, energy efficiency strategies have
been extensively investigated in the literature for SatCom
networks [11] and are also one of the main concern in the
development of the next-generation hybrid satellite/terrestrial
networks which will be integrated in the upcoming 5G terrestrial infrastructure [12]–[15].
Routing strategies should be defined by considering energy
efficiency as a crucial aspect. Several studies have already
been performed with this aim. Reference [16] proposes a
satellite power model and three routing algorithms focusing
on prolonging satellite lifetime by minimizing the battery
recharge/discharge cycle number and exploiting node sleep
mode strategies. A method based on Multi-power Level MultiTransmission (MLMT) Space-Time Graph is proposed in [17]
to reduce the energy consumption for broadcast communications: a heuristic algorithm finds an energy-efficient path
through the graph from the start time of the broadcast to
the given deadline. Reference [18] proposes an online control algorithm, called EESE, that minimizes the overall energy

891

consumption over time in a network composed of a satellite swarm with Inter-Satellite Links (ISLs) and terrestrial
terminal stations opportunely redirecting traffic through different satellite-ground links. Energy-efficiency in nanosatellite
networks is investigated in [19] that proposes a multiple hopping relay methodology to deliver scientific data to ground terminals with the optimal energy balance of the entire network.
A technical description of the satellite Electrical Power System
(EPS) is reported in [20] highlighting some useful considerations to prolong battery lifetime, such as the minimization
of the Depth of Discharge (DoD), i.e., of the percentage of
the battery that has been discharged relatively to the overall
battery’s capacity. A topology-aware approach to reduce the
energy consumption of an overall LEO satellite constellation is
proposed in [21]: it dynamically computes when switching on
and off each ISL in order to save energy but still guaranteeing
a certain degree of connectivity. An energy harvesting-aware
routing algorithm for nanosatellite networks, called 3DEHR,
has been proposed in [22], where the variables which affect
the routing path computation are the current satellite positions
with respect to the source and destination locations and the
amount of energy that satellite’s solar panel can generate.
However, none of these proposed solutions has been
developed for DTN-satellite networks and none of them considers that sometimes satellites may not be able to send data
packets through the computed routing paths due to a too low
available energy level.
B. Routing in DTN-Satellite Networks
Routing issues in DTN networks involve additional variables if compared to the ones used in “classical” networks.
The topology is not constant during all network lifetime and
the link status may change over time. “Classical” routing algorithms aim is to find the best currently-available path to move
traffic end-to-end in terms of one or more defined metrics
(e.g., minimum delivery time, packet loss, . . .), but, in DTN
networks, an end-to-end path may be permanently unavailable.
To allow data exchange, DTN nodes can store data packets in
their buffers for a much longer time compared to terrestrial
routers by employing long-term storage. The DTN routing
problem is a constrained optimization problem where single
links may be unavailable for long times and with resource
constraints at each node.
In a DTN-satellite network, satellites predictably change
their position. Information about contact start times and durations is known a priori, which eases the development of
possible solutions [23]. When changes in connectivity are
planned and scheduled, one of the most used routing algorithms is the Contact Graph Routing (CGR) [10]. Routing
decisions are performed by using a “Contact Plan” (CP), which
is a time-ordered list of scheduled contacts indicating the
start and end time of each contact. Each DTN intermediate
node between sources and destinations computes its own path
for each packet, called bundle, and locally makes its own
next hop decision. There are papers in the literature whose
purpose is to prove the reliability of CGR in LEO SatCom
networks [24], [25]. Other papers propose to extend the basic

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 20:00:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

892

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 4, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2020

version of CGR through enhancements which can be useful for routing in the considered DTN-based nanosatellite
network. For example, a version called CGR-ETO (Earliest
Transmission Opportunity) has been proposed in [26]. It considers also the queuing delay due to bundles already stored
and waiting to be transmitted. An additional problem needs
to be addressed in case of different priority classes. When a
node forwards a higher priority bundle it deliberately neglects
lower priority ones previously received in order to enforce priority. This can cause the oversubscription of a contact if it is
already fully booked by lower priority bundles. A modification of CGR, called Overbooking Management, is proposed
in [27]. It minimizes the consequences of overbooking by
early handling. Another extension consists in a source routing version of the CGR called CGR with Extension Blocks
(CGR-EB) [28] which encodes path and traffic information
into routed messages, extending CGR in two ways: (1) it
permits non-monotonically increasing or decreasing cost functions and (2) it uses virtual circuits to avoid routing loops and
reduce computations [29].
We performed similar studies related to routing in DTNbased nanosatellite networks in [30], [31], and references
therein. In these studies, we focused our attention on the
bundle delivery time reduction by considering the known a
priori contact information and the strict limitation of nanosatellite buffer storage. In this paper, we consider the limitation
of nanosatellite available energy and the different variables
related to the telecommunication task which contribute to
energy consumption, such as data transmission and reception.
To the best of our knowledge, current CGR extensions do
not consider node available energy as a variable which can
affect the obtained performance and the routing path computation. This work can be considered as an extension of the
work presented in [32].
III. R EFERENCE S CENARIO
Before illustrating the proposed routing algorithm in detail,
the considered reference scenario is described in order to better
understand its components, each node’s protocol stack architecture, and how nodes interact to complete the data delivery.
In this way, a better comprehension of the DTN aim and of
the different factors which contribute to the satellite energy
consumption is provided.
Figure 1 shows a picture of a portion of the considered
DTN-based nanosatellite scenario.
Terrestrial Areas (TAs) are composed of one Ground Station
(GS) and of a set of Ground Terminals (GTs). TAs are rural
or remote areas where there is no terrestrial infrastructure
to link them to the outside network (Internet). An economic
way to allow them exchanging data is through a LEO multiorbit nanosatellite (nSAT) constellation. GTs are the terminal
generating and receiving data, i.e., the source an destination
endpoints. GSs, on one hand, collect/deliver data from/to the
GTs located in the covered areas, and, on the other hand,
send/receive data to/from the constellation. As said, a persistent end-to-end path between source and destination endpoints,
i.e., a path whose links are always active at the same time, may

Fig. 1.

DTN-based nanosatellite reference scenario.

be not guaranteed. GSs may not always be in visibility of
a satellite so suffering from “black-out” connectivity periods
depending on the position and number of employed nSATs,
and on the constellation design parameters. Considering nSAT
low altitude, each nSAT can simultaneously cover a limited
set of areas depending on the distance among them. nSATs
act as “data mule” uploading data from source GSs and keeping them stored in a buffer until the contact with destination
GSs starts. The DTN paradigm helps equip nSATs with this
ability, tackling long delays and disruptions.
Figure 2 depicts the considered network stack architecture
to allow long-term storage at intermediate nodes.
GTs are regular Internet hosts implementing the standard
Internet protocol stack; nSATs are DTN nodes implementing
the DTN architecture through the BL [8]; GSs are equipped
with a TCP/IP interface towards GTs and a DTN interface
towards nSATs. They act as DTN gateways implementing a
relay function, encapsulating each data packet received from
the TCP/IP interface in a bundle before sending it to the
nSAT, and performing the de-encapsulation process on the
reverse path. The term bundle here refers to a message composed of a payload containing the application data and of
a header containing the protocol control information necessary for the end-to-end delivery. The BL is directly interfaced
with the lower layer of the satellite dedicated protocol stack.
Intermediate nodes (GSs and nSATs) are DTN-based also to
allow the communication through heterogeneous network portions, while GTs are standard Internet stack devices to avoid
the need of ad-hoc devices or the implementation of software modifications. UDP can be easily employed as transport
protocol, while TCP requires additional considerations. TCP
support can be guaranteed through performance-enhancing
proxies (PEPs) based on TCP-splitting. PEPs can split TCP
connections into more parts, in order to isolate satellite links
from the rest of the network [9]. In the scenario in Figure 2,
TCP would act between source GTs and source GSs and
between destination GSs and destination GTs. The satellite
portion between Source and Destination GSs may benefit from
dedicated transport layer solutions if needed.
The BL implements the proposed E-CGR algorithm which
enables the correct packet forwarding to the destination

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 20:00:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MARCHESE AND PATRONE: ENERGY-AWARE CONTACT GRAPH ROUTING OVER NANOSATELLITE NETWORKS

Fig. 2.

893

Network architecture.

exploiting both the complete knowledge of future contacts [10]
and the information about the nSAT available energy that is a
more critical element for nSATs than for GSs. The purpose of
E-CGR is to avoid the complete discharge of nSATs’ battery,
avoiding the occurrence of situations in which nSATs are not
able to send previously uploaded data to their destinations due
to a too low energy level.
IV. E NERGY-AWARE ROUTING A LGORITHM E-CGR
A. Satellite Energy Model
Before describing in depth the E-CGR algorithm, we will
briefly look at the satellite system energy model in order to
understand how our algorithm estimates the satellite available
energy values.
The main component of a satellite EPS is a board aimed
at distributing the available energy to all satellite subsystems [33]. Most small satellites are only powered by energy
gathered by solar panels mounted on the satellite’s external
surface. The average generated power ranges from a few to a
few tens Watts due to the reduced size of the external structure. This value can be increased by using deployable solar
panels [34]. Since satellites revolve around the Earth, their
solar panels supply power periodically and for certain Sundependent time periods influenced by factors such as satellite
altitude and orbit shape. Typical low orbits expose satellites
to the Sun for about 2/3 of their 90-105 minute duration, so
they need batteries to store energy in order to be operative also
when they are in the shadow of the Earth (eclipse periods).
The amount of power generated by a solar panel at the time
instant t depends on the angle between the sunlight and the
solar panel normal vector α, which depends on the satellite’s
position and attitude. Typical small satellites employ singleaxis solar tracking systems to minimize α [16]. Let β be the
angle between the satellite’s orbital plane and the sunlight and
θ the angle between the current satellite’s position and the
position where the satellite is at the greatest distance from the
Sun, the minimum value of α (αm ) can be obtained as:

(1)
αm = arccos 1 − cos2 β cos2 θ
The derivation of Eq. (1) is reported in the [16, Appendix].

Let η denote the energy conversion efficiency, γ the amount
of solar irradiance per unit area, and A the solar panels’ area,
the output power Ps generated by the solar panels can be
modelled as:
Ps = η · γ · A · cos αm

(2)

Considering the eclipse periods when there is no solar irradiance and, consequently, Ps = 0, Eq. (2) can be re-written as:

0,
if |θ| < θ0
Ps =
(3)
η · γ · A · cos αm , otherwise
The eclipse period duration depends on α and the satellite
altitude h, because the shadow of the Earth is a cone which
can intersect the satellite path or be completely below it. In
this way, the satellite is in the shadow of the Earth when
−θo ≤ θ ≤ θo , where:
θo =

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨0,



R
if β > arcsin
R+h


R2 · cos2 β−(2Rh+h 2 ) · sin2 β
⎪
⎪
arcsin
, otherwise
⎪
⎩
(R+h) · cos β

(4)
where R is the mean radius of the Earth (typically 6371 km).
The efficiency of a solar panel conversion is not constant for
all its lifetime but degrades over time due to some factors such
as the ultraviolet degradation, redication degradation, fatigue
(thermal cycling), and micrometeoroid loss [35]. Besides, a
rise in the temperature decreases the amount of power generated by solar panels. However, we do not consider them in
our model because their effects are negligible in the considered
analysis time.
Satellites are usually equipped with rechargeable battery cells (often Li-Ion batteries but other kinds are also
employed [33]) which store energy when the output power
of the solar panels is greater than the demanded power and
vice versa. Both recharge and discharge rates of a battery are
limited and depend on the recharge and discharge efficiencies,
respectively, which are affected by different factors such as
the efficiency of AC/DC transfer and the voltage transfer [16].
Let C max denote the maximum battery capacity, C(t)
the battery charge at time t, r + /r − the maximum
recharge/discharge rates, δ + /δ − the recharge/discharge efficiencies, Ps (t) the solar panels’ output power at time t, and

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 20:00:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

894

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 4, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2020

Pd (t) the power drawn by satellite components at time t, the
battery charge at time t + Δt, where Δt is a short time during
which the recharge/discharge conditions do not change, when
Ps (t) ≥ Pd (t) can be defined as:
C (t+Δt) =

⎧
⎨C max ,

if C (t) = C max



⎩C (t)+Δt min r + , Ps (t)−Pd (t) · δ + , otherwise

(5)
Similarly, the battery charge at time t + Δt when Ps (t) ≤
Pd (t) ≤ Ps (t) + r + can be defined as:


C (t + Δt) =

0,
if C (t) = 0

C (t) − Δt min r − , Pd (t) − Ps (t) · δ − , otherwise

(6)
Several factors contribute to energy consumption:
Keep transceiver active: Po denotes the power consumption to keep the satellite transceiver on, allowing the
satellite to receive and transmit data. We set it to a constant and we assume that satellite transceivers are active
only when satellites are in contact with ground stations,
i.e., they are turned off (Po = 0) when no planned contacts are ongoing in order to exploit the power saving
principle of sleeping strategies [36].
• Data reception: Er indicates the energy consumption due
to data reception per bit. We set it to a constant.
• Data caching: data may need to be stored on-board satellites for a long time waiting to the next transmission
opportunity. Let Ewrite /Eread be the energy consumption
to write/read one bit in satellite’s buffer, Vsupp the voltage supply, Iwrite /Iread the current required to write/read
one bit in/from the satellite’s buffer, and Twrite /Tread
the time required to write/read one bit in/from the satellite’s buffer, the energy consumption due to data caching
per bit Ecache can be defined as (7) from [19]:
•

Ecache = Ewrite + Eread
= Vsupp · (Iwrite · Twrite + Iread · Tread ) (7)
•

Data transmission: Several metrics have been defined to
quantify the energy consumption due to data transmission [37]. Let Pt be the satellite transmission power,
tb the time to transmit one bit, Pc be the average circuit power including all electronic power consumption of
satellite components except for the transmission power, W
the satellite channel bandwidth, N0 be the noise spectral
density, d the distance between transmitter and receiver
(satellite and ground station), and a the satellite channel
attenuation factor, we consider the metric Energy per bit
Et [38] defined as:
Et = Pt · tb + Pc · tb

 1
2 W ·tb − 1 · W · N0
=
· tb + Pc · tb .
d −a

(8)

B. E-CGR Description
The main aim of E-CGR is preventing nSATs to be unable to
send the data stored in their buffers when they enter in contact

Fig. 3.

E-CGR algorithm.

with the planned next hop (destination GS) due to a too low
available energy. This event would significantly degrade the
obtained performance because nSATs would need (at least)
one entire orbit time before entering again in contact with
the same GS. For this reason, E-CGR allows source GSs to
check, from the energy viewpoint, if the nSAT in contact is
able to forward the bundles to their next hop before starting
to transmit data to it. In other words, the source GS sends
bundles to the nSAT in contact only if the nSAT’s estimated
available energy when it enters in contact with the bundles’
destination GS is sufficient to guarantee bundle forwarding.
This procedure is summarized in Figure 3(a) and described in
detail in the following.
A data packet is received and encapsulated in a data bundle B by a GS GSBS . The data packet has been generated

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 20:00:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MARCHESE AND PATRONE: ENERGY-AWARE CONTACT GRAPH ROUTING OVER NANOSATELLITE NETWORKS

by a GT GTBS and destined to another GT GTBD located
in the area managed by another GS GSBD . GSBS computes
a set of possible routing paths by applying the standard CGR
(CalculateRoutingPaths function in Figure 3(b)) in order to
find the routing path which minimizes B’s delivery time.
GSBS keeps B stored in its buffer until the next communication opportunity with the identified next hop (satellite SATBS )
takes place. When a contact between GSBS and SATBS starts,
SATBS sends a defined bundle, called energy bundle, containing information about SATBS ’s current available energy
and the amount of data stored in its buffer waiting to be
forwarded to GSs. GSBS exploits this information to verify
if the previously computed routing path through SATBS is
exploitable (ChooseRoutingPath function in Figure 3(c)), i.e.,
if SATBS will have enough energy to transmit B when it enters
in contact with GSBD . To do so, GSBS estimates the value of
SATBS ’s available energy in the time instant when B should
be sent to GSBD and check if it is sufficient to guarantee B’s
transmission.
S
Let t e,SATB be the last time information about SATBS availS
able energy has been received, Ea (SATBS , t e,SATB ) the
tx ,SAT S ,j

S

B
SATBS ’s available energy at t e,SATB , tB
the
S
bundle B’s transmission time from SATB to node j,
S

S ,j
tx ,SATB

in,t e,SATB ,tB
ESAT S
B

S

S ,j
tx ,SATB

out,t e,SATB ,tB
/ESAT S
B

the sum of the

terms which contribute to increase/decrease SATBS ’s available
tx ,SATBS ,j

S

energy in the time interval between t e,SATB and tB
SL,t

S
e,SATB

DSAT S

S ,j
tx ,SATB
,tB

the sum of the durations of all node

B

tx ,SATBS ,j

S

SATBS ’s Sun periods between t e,SATB and tB
S
t

S
e,SATB

NSAT S

B
e,SATBS

tx ,SATB ,j
,tB

,

,

the number of contacts of SATBS between

tx ,SAT S ,j

B
t
and tB
, Xz the amount of data received by
z
S
th
SATBS in the z th contact, DSAT
S the duration of SATB ’s z
B

z
S
contact, QSAT
S the amount of data SATB will send during
B

its z th contact, and QE the size of energy bundles, the estitx ,SAT S ,j

B
mated value of SATBS ’s available energy at tB
can be
computed as in Eq. (9), shown at the bottom of the page.
In this way, GSBS estimates the future value of SATBS ’s
available energy starting from the value contained in
S
the last received energy bundle (Ea (SATBS , t e,SATB )) and
considering the amounts of recharged and discharged energy
until B’s transmission to GSBD .

895

Finally, GSBS proceeds with B’s transmission only after
checking if SATBS is able to send all the data bundles already
stored in its buffer through the planned contacts, avoiding that
B’s transmission prevents the transmission of other data bundles already stored in SATBS ’s buffer due to an insufficient
energy level.
Let GS be the GSs’ set, QSAT S →g the amount of
B
data stored in SATS ’s buffer to be forwarded to the node
g, and QB the bundle B’s size, B’s transmission takes
place if:

Ea

S
tx ,SATB
,j
SATBS , tB



⎧
D
⎨Q
g ∈ GS g = GSB
S →g · Et
SATB

≥ 
⎩ QSAT S →g + QB · Et g = GSBD
B

(10)
If all inequalities in (10) are positively verified, GSBS sends
B through SATBS , otherwise, another routing path will be
chosen.
V. P ERFORMANCE A NALYSIS
A. Simulation Framework
The simulation platform is based on a module developed
for the software Network Simulator 3 (NS3). It is described
in detail in [31] and includes:
• a Scenario sub-module, which allows simulating different scenarios by changing network topology parameters,
such as the number and position of GSs, the number of
GTs per area, and some parameters, such as the satellite
and terrestrial link bandwidth;
• a DTN sub-module, which implements the characteristics of the DTN paradigm needed to guarantee the
communication in the considered DTN-based nanosatellite network. It includes a store and forward mechanism, a
personalized and light version of the Bundle Protocol [8],
and the E-CGR algorithm;
• a LEO nanosatellite constellation sub-module, which
allows defining different LEO satellite constellations by
changing the number of satellites and orbital planes,
orbital plane parameters, and satellite design parameters,
such as the satellite battery capacity and solar panel surface area. During the simulations, this module updates the
position of each nSAT in order to simulate real satellite
tracks.
The simulator allows setting GSs’ position and nSATs’ initial position in a 3-D space. GSs’ positions are set through
Latitude, Longitude, and Altitude (LLA) coordinates, whilst



S tx ,SAT S ,j
S tx ,SAT S ,j


B
B
S
in,t e,SATB ,tB
out,t e,SATB ,tB
tx ,SATBS ,j
Ea SATBS , tB
− ESAT S
= Ea SATBS , t e,SATB + ESAT S
B
B
S tx ,SAT S ,j


B
S
SL,t e,SATB ,tB
= Ea SATBS , t e,SATB + Ps · DSAT S
+
B

N

−

t

S
e,SATB

SAT S
B

,t

S ,j
tx ,SATB
B


z =1



z
z
+
Q
+
Q
Xz · Er + Po · DSAT
S
E · Et
SATBS
B

(9)

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 20:00:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

896

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 4, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2020

TABLE I
S IMULATED S CENARIO D ESIGN PARAMETERS

nSATs’ locations are computed and updated by using the
widespread NORAD SGP4 orbital model [39].

B. Simulation Results
The scenario considered as a starting point for our simulation analysis is composed of 120 nSATs, 100 GSs, and
1000 GTs per GS. nSATs are equally distributed among 10
circular orbits and equally spaced within each orbit. GSs
are equally distributed throughout the Earth’s continents.
We avoided setting unrealistic GS positions, such as above
oceans.
Delay-tolerant traffic flows are generated by the GTs of each
area following a Poisson distribution. Each traffic flow is modelled as an on/off process with constant inter-period time Ti , a
fixed number of packets Np transmitted per active period, and
a fixed packet + bundle header size QB . Destination endpoints
are GTs chosen randomly but located in different areas than
source GTs, in order to force data packets to be forwarded
through the nSAT constellation.
The numerical values of nSAT orbital planes, satellite links,
nSAT energy model, traffic flow, and simulation configuration
parameters are summarized in Table I.
The satellite data rate is set to 50 Mbps considering nSAT
commercially available transceivers operating in X-band or
Ku-band. We set different values of β for each orbital plane.
Even if β is not constant but depends on the relative position
of Earth and Sun, we can assume it as a constant due to the relatively short simulation duration we have chosen. We consider
satellite half-charged battery at the beginning of the simulations. Since the exact amount of data that SATBS uploads
S

tx ,SAT S ,GS D

B
B
during each contact between t e,SATB and tB
cannot be known a priori (Xz in Eq. (9)), we decided to consider
the worst case, i.e., SATBS receives the maximum possible
amount of data for these contacts (contact volumes).

Three sets of simulations have been performed by changing: the number of GSs nGSs, of GTs per GS nGTs, and of
nanosatellites nSATs. The aim is to stress the network with
different traffic flow configurations by increasing the number
of traffic flows (and, consequently, the overall traffic volume)
and increasing/decreasing the network forward capability. For
each topology configuration, 100 simulation runs have been
carried out by changing the randomly generated destination
GTs. The shown results are averaged over the simulation runs.
The results obtained by using E-CGR and standard CGR
are compared through two performance metrics: the Average
Delivery Time (ADT) and the Percentage of Delivered Packets
(PDP).
ADT is defined as:
ADT =

P
RX − T TX
p
p=1 Tp

(11)
P
where P is the total number of generated data packets and
TpTX and TpRX are the time instants when the p th data packet
is sent by the source GT and is received by the destination GT,
respectively.
The obtained results are shown in Figure 4. Their variations
are not shown because they would not be visible due to their
low values (between about ±2%). Information regarding the
95% confidence intervals is reported in Table II.
As we expected, the ADT increases by increasing nGSs
and nGTs due to the high amount of data which traverse the
network, and by decreasing nSATs due to the lower number of
available intermediate nodes and, consequently, to the lower
contact opportunities and available bandwidth to upload data.
The performance improvement by using E-CGR increases is:
the ADT increase is up to 135% by using the standard CGR
and up to 63% by using the E-CGR by increasing the number
of GS in the shown interval. E-CGR performance improvement
ranges from 0% (for nGSs = 100) to 31% (for nGSs = 500).
By varying the number of GTs, the ADT increase is up to

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 20:00:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MARCHESE AND PATRONE: ENERGY-AWARE CONTACT GRAPH ROUTING OVER NANOSATELLITE NETWORKS

Fig. 4.

897

Average Delivery Time (ADT) obtained by changing the topology of the simulated network.

TABLE II
95% C ONFIDENCE I NTERVAL OF ADT AND PDP
O BTAINED P ERFORMANCE

almost 200% by using the standard CGR and up to 92% by
using the E-CGR. E-CGR performance improvement ranges
from 0% (for nGTs = 1000) to 35% (for nGSs = 10000).
Decreasing the number of deployed satellites leads to an ADT
decrease of up to almost 100% by using the standard CGR
and up to 62% by using the E-CGR, with a not negligible
E-CGR performance improvement only for nSATs = 60 and
nSATs = 40 of 16% and 18%, respectively.
The main reason for this behavior is that, by using standard CGR, satellites are sometimes not able to download data
bundles when they enter in contact with the destination GSs
due to the insufficient battery level. Higher is the data traffic

volume, higher the satellite energy consumption, and higher
the occurrence of satellite transmission unavailability due to
the low energy level. Consequently, some nSATs have to keep
data bundles stored in their buffers waiting for the next available contacts, wasting satellite buffer capacity and worsening
the obtained performance. The same effect takes place with
low values of nSATs. On the contrary, the performance does
not significantly change by increasing nSATs above the considered standard value. The main reason is that even if the
waiting time inside source GSs’ buffer decreases due to the
higher availability of nSATs, their battery level is always high
enough to let them send all stored data, nullifying the E-CGR
performance improvement. Even if they follow the same trend,
the performance obtained by increasing nGSs is slightly worse
than the ones obtained increasing nGTs with the same amount
of traffic flows traversing the network. For example, the ADT
obtained in the simulation with nGSs = 500 and nGTs = 1000
(Figure 4, first graph, fifth group of data) is higher than the
one obtained with nGSs = 100 and nGTs = 5000 (Figure 4,
second graph, third group of data). In both cases, the overall number of data packets that need to be forwarded through
the satellites is the same, as well as, consequently, the overall
amount of energy consumed for data reception, data caching,
and data transmission. However, the amount of energy required
to keep the satellite transceiver active is higher when nGSs is
increased due to the higher amount of time that each satellite
is in contact with a GS, which leads, for some contacts, to
a lower amount of uploaded packets and, consequently, to a
higher ADT.
The percentage of packets that have not been delivered by
the end of the simulation with the standard CGR is considerable. It is ranges between 6% and 18% by increasing nGSs,
between 6% and 29% by increasing nGTs, and between 5%
and 16% by decreasing nSATs. This percentage lowers by
using E-CGR, ranging between 6% and 11% by increasing
nGSs, between 6% and 18% by increasing nGTs, and between
5% and 11% by decreasing nSATs. For this performance
parameter, the E-CGR performance improvement is up to 7%
and 11% increasing nGSs and nGTs, respectively, and is 3%
and 6% for nSATs = 60 and nSATs = 40, respectively.
A fourth set of simulations has been performed by changing
the maximum satellite battery capacity C max . The obtained

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 20:00:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

898

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 4, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2020

Fig. 5.

Percentage of Delivered Packets (PDP) obtained changing the topology of the simulated network.

Fig. 6.

Performance obtained by changing the maximum satellite battery capacity C.

results in terms of both ADT and PDP are shown in Figure 6
and follow the same trend of the previous ones.
The mean obtained Percentages of Delivered Packets (PDP)
from the beginning to the end of the simulations and their percentage variations over the different simulation runs are shown
in Figure 5. Again, information regarding the 95% confidence
intervals is reported in Table II.
The performance worsens by reducing C max because the
satellite battery may fully discharge making them unavailable
to upload further data during contacts. However, also in this
case, the obtained performance by using the standard CGR and
the E-CGR are the same for high C max values. The reason
is that C max is high enough to avoid satellite battery fully
discharges with the simulated traffic flow configuration. In
this case, a smart management of the satellite available energy
becomes useless because satellites are always able to send all
the data stored in their buffers. In detail, for Cmax = 20 Wh
and Cmax = 10 Wh, the ADT increase is, respectively, of 32%
and 136% by using the standard CGR and of 3% and 53%
by using the E-CGR, while the PDP decrease is of 8% and
10% by using the standard CGR and of 1% and 3% by using
the E-CGR. For the same two values of C max , the E-CGR
improvement in terms of ADT is of 22% and 34% while in
terms of PDP is 6% and 6.5%, respectively.
Also for these results, additional information regarding the
95% confidence intervals is reported in Table II.

C. E-CGR Computational Complexity
The computational complexity introduced by E-CGR is proportional to the length of the CP, which is proportional to the
number of GS and nSAT in the considered scenario.
As can be seen by looking at Figure 3(a), line 3, the
CalculateRoutingPaths function scrolls the entire CP of the
node under consideration (NHl ) and compute at least one routing path for each row if it fits the requirements in line 4.
Besides, the function can call itself more times (line 10) until
the computed path reaches the source ground station GSGS
(line 6). Considering the scenario depicted in Figure 1, all
computed routing paths are two-hop paths: GSBS → SATBS →
GSBD . It means that the CalculateRoutingPaths function starts
analysing the GSBD ’s CP and calls itself only one time for
each iteration of the “for cycle” in line 10. Let LGS D be the
B

length of GSBD ’s CP and LSAT S the length of SATBS ’s CP,
B
the computational complexity of the CalculateRoutingPaths
function is O(LGS D · LSAT S ).
B
B
Looking at Figure 3(c), line 2, the ChooseRoutingPath function scrolls the entire routing path list RP B to find the
routing path which guarantees the minimum delivery time
and satisfies the imposed energy checks, each related to a
GS. Let LRP B be the length of RP B , i.e., the number of
computed routing paths, the computational complexity of the
CalculateRoutingPaths function is O(LRP B · nGSs).

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 20:00:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MARCHESE AND PATRONE: ENERGY-AWARE CONTACT GRAPH ROUTING OVER NANOSATELLITE NETWORKS

Fig. 7.

Computational times required to perform E-CGR and their CDFs by changing nGSs.

Fig. 8.

Computational times required to perform E-CGR and their CDFs by changing nSATs.

Figures 7 and 8 show the computational times and the relative Cumulative Density Functions (CDFs) to finalize the
routing path computation process obtained by changing the
number of GSs and nSATs. These times have been measured
for each scenario in the same GS by our NS3-based simulator running on a PC with a AMD Ryzen 5 2600 six-core
processor and 16 GB DDR4 RAM. The results obtained by
changing the number of GTs per GS are not shown because
this parameter does not affect the E-CGR computational
times.
As expected, the obtained results show higher computational
times for the scenarios with a higher number of nodes, i.e.,
higher values of nGSs and nSATs, due to the greater length of
the CP and the higher number of computed possible routing
paths.
Moreover, the computational times highlight also a decrease
over time. The reason for these trends is related to the lower
knowledge available for the routing path computation. In
the simulated scenarios, the simulator receives in input a
contact plan describing how the contacts will evolve in 24
hours, i.e., the time interval of future contact knowledge is
24 hours at the beginning of the simulation and it shortens when the simulation end approaches. As a consequence,
lower the number of contacts which satisfy the requirement
in Figure 3(a), line 4, lower the number of iterations inside
the CalculateRoutingPaths function, and lower the size of the
RP B list.
The same trend can be seen by analysing the number
of computational operations (comparison, sum/subtraction,
and multiplication/division) performed by each execution
of the E-CGR algorithm’s code, shown in Figures 9
and 10.

899

These additional results have been included in order to give
a more precise idea of the possible hardware required in the
GSs to allow the E-CGR execution.
Further increasing the time horizon knowledge, as well as
the number of nodes, would lead to a further increase of the
needed computation times and of the required resources in
terms of computational power and memory storage. A possible solution which will be tested as a future work consists in
setting a bound to the maximum number of contacts per bundle
computed by the E-CGR. In othr words, we plan to perform
the routing path computation process by limiting the considered future knowledge of the network contacts. This strategy
could lead to sub-optimal solutions but it should help keep the
resource consumption and the computation times under fixed
thresholds.
D. Satellite’s Available Energy Estimation
During the routing path computation, the E-CGR estimates
each satellite’s available energy when it will enter in contact
with the source GS (Eq (9)). This quantity is an estimation
because even if most of the required information are known,
the amount of data that the satellite will upload before entering in contact with the source GS (Xz quantities) cannot be
known.
In order to assess the relation between the obtained
performance and the reliability of the satellite’s available
energy estimation, a further set of tests has been performed
by varying the chosen Xz values whose possible range is
between 0 and the contact volume of the z th contact Vz ,
i.e., the maximum amount of data that can be received by
the satellite in the z th contact.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 20:00:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

900

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 4, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2020

Fig. 9.

Number of computational operations performed by each execution of the E-CGR’s code by changing nGSs.

Fig. 10.

Number of computational operations performed by each execution of the E-CGR’s code by changing nSATs.

The results in Figure 11 show the performance
obtained in the reference scenario (nSATs = 120,
nGSs = 100, and nGTs = 1000) by setting 11 different values for Xz : from 0% to 100% of Vz at 10%
steps.

The obtained results highlight a significant performance
increase by moving to a more conservative assumption regarding the data uploaded on the satellite under analysis before
entering in contact with the GS which is computing the routing path by using E-GCR. The main reason is that assuming a

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 20:00:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MARCHESE AND PATRONE: ENERGY-AWARE CONTACT GRAPH ROUTING OVER NANOSATELLITE NETWORKS

Fig. 11.

901

Performance obtained by using E-CGR changing the value of Xv variable in Eq. (9).

value close to 0, E-CGR will more likely select a path through
a satellite different from the one currently in contact with the
source GS, because that satellite’s estimated available energy
will be higher. However, in some cases, this turns out to be
a too optimistic estimation, which leads to an estimated value
higher than the real one and to additional waiting times in the
source GS.
On the contrary, a too conservative estimation does not lead
to a performance decrease. The main reason could be that
in most cases the routing path with minimum delivery time
is the one which includes the satellite currently in contact
with the source GS. In this case, if this satellite has enough
available energy to upload and then download the data bundle
to the destination GS, it is always the best choice in terms of
the two considered performance variables. However, this last
consideration could not be always true but it could depend on
the structure of the considered satellite constellation and the
overall network topology. Further investigations are required to
properly analyse this situation in order to state which optimal
value for the Xv parameter could be (if exists) and how it
could be related to the network design.
VI. C ONCLUSION
Small LEO satellites are more and more appealing to perform different tasks, such as building SatCom networks to
integrate in the upcoming 5G terrestrial infrastructure, especially thanks to their reduced cost. However, reduced costs
and size lead to hardware limitations and available resource
constrains which have to be considered. Energy consumption
awareness is a critical feature which has to be taken into
account in the design of LEO SatCom networks. The unpredictable occurrences of situations where satellites are not able
to normally operate due to their low energy level should be
avoided.
In this paper, we propose an energy-aware routing algorithm for DTN-based nanosatellite networks called E-CGR. It
aims to make ground stations aware of nanosatellites’ available energy in order to send data only when nanosatellites will
have enough energy to carry out data forwarding.
The obtained results of E-CGR show an improvement of
the two considered performance metrics (average data delivery

time and amount of packets delivered to their destinations)
with respect to CGR. They also show the computational complexity and times required by E-CGR to perform the routing
path computation for each bundle and how the considered
performance metrics are affected by the estimation of the
satellite’s available energy.
As a possible future work, other scenario parameters which
could affect routing path computation, such as nanosatellite buffer occupancy, could be considered together with the
energy, in order to develop a routing algorithm able to perform
routing decisions by exploiting the complete set of available
knowledge.
R EFERENCES
[1] J. Bouwmeester and J. Guo, “Survey of worldwide pico-and nanosatellite
missions, distributions and subsystem technology,” Acta Astronautica,
vol. 67, nos. 7–8, pp. 854–862, 2010.
[2] Eutelsat LEO for Objects (ELO). Accessed: Aug. 31, 2019. [Online].
Available: http://news.eutelsat.com/pressreleases/eutelsat-commissionselo-its-first-low-earth-orbit-satellite-designed-for-the-internet-of-things2440770
[3] B. G. Evans, “The role of satellites in 5G,” in Proc. 7th Adv. Satellite
Multimedia Syst. Conf. 13th Signal Process. Space Commun. Workshop
(ASMS/SPSC), Livorno, Italy, 2014, pp. 197–202.
[4] K. An, T. Liang, X. Yan, Y. Li, and X. Qiao, “Power allocation in
land mobile satellite systems: An energy-efficient perspective,” IEEE
Commun. Lett., vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 1374–1377, Jul. 2018.
[5] F. Alagoz and G. Gur, “Energy efficiency and satellite networking:
A holistic overview,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 99, no. 11, pp. 1954–1979,
Nov. 2011.
[6] M. Marchese, QoS Over Heterogeneous Networks. Chichester, U.K.:
Wiley, 2007.
[7] V. Cerf et al., “Delay-tolerant networking architecture,” Internet Eng.
Task Force, RFC 4838, 2007.
[8] K. L. Scott and S. Burleigh, “Bundle protocol specification,” Internet
Eng. Task Force, RFC 5050, 2007.
[9] C. Caini, H. Cruickshank, S. Farrell, and M. Marchese, “Delayand disruption-tolerant networking (DTN): An alternative solution for
future satellite networking applications,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 99, no. 11,
pp. 1980–1997, Nov. 2011.
[10] S. Burleigh, “Contact graph routing,” IETF, Fremont, CA, USA, Internet
Draft, 2010.
[11] F. Davoli, “Satellite networking in the context of green, flexible and
programmable networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Pers. Satellite Services
(PSATS). 2016, pp. 1–11.
[12] J. Zhang, B. Evans, M. A. Imran, X. Zhang, and W. Wang, “Green
hybrid satellite terrestrial networks: Fundamental trade-off analysis,” in
Proc. 83rd Veh. Technol. Conf. (VTC Spring), Nanjing, China, 2016,
pp. 1–5.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 20:00:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

902

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 4, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2020

[13] Y. Xu, Y. Wang, R. Sun, and Y. Zhang, “Joint relay selection and
power allocation for maximum energy efficiency in hybrid satelliteaerial-terrestrial systems,” in Proc. 27th Annu. Int. Symp. Pers. Indoor
Mobile Radio Commun. (PIMRC), Valencia, Spain, 2016, pp. 1–6.
[14] J. Zhang, X. Zhang, M. A. Imran, B. Evans, Y. Zhang, and W. Wang,
“Energy efficient hybrid satellite terrestrial 5G networks with software defined features,” J. Commun. Netw., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 147–161,
Apr. 2017.
[15] Y. Ruan, Y. Li, C.-X. Wang, and R. Zhang, “Energy efficient adaptive
transmissions in integrated satellite-terrestrial networks with SER constraints,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 210–222,
Jan. 2018.
[16] Y. Yang, M. Xu, D. Wang, and Y. Wang, “Towards energy-efficient
routing in satellite networks,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 34,
no. 12, pp. 3869–3886, Dec. 2016.
[17] N. Yu, Z. Wang, H. Huang, and X. Jia, “Minimal energy broadcast for
delay-bounded applications in satellite networks,” IEEE Trans. Green
Commun. Netw., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 795–803, Sep. 2018.
[18] Y. An et al., “EESE: Energy-efficient communication between
satellite swarms and Earth stations,” in Proc. 16th Int. Conf.
Adv. Commun. Technol. (ICACT), Pyeongchang, South Korea, 2014,
pp. 845–850.
[19] L. Shengchang, L. Jionghui, T. M. Chao, C. Qing, and Z. Jinxiu, “Energy
efficient network strategy for nanosatellites cluster flight formations,”
in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Spacecraft Formation Flying Missions Technol.
(SFFMT), 2013, pp. 1–13.
[20] S.-S. Jang and J. Choi, “Energy balance analysis of small satellite in
low Earth orbit (LEO),” in Proc. 2nd Int. Power Energy Conf. (PECon),
Johor Bahru, Malaysia, 2008, pp. 967–971.
[21] M. Hussein, I. Elayyan, and W. Ghanem, “Topology-aware approach
for reducing power consumption in LEO satellite constellations,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Commun. Syst. Inf. Security (ACOSIS), Marrakesh,
Morocco, 2016, pp. 1–5.
[22] J. Wang, R. Zhang, J. Yuan, and X. Du, “A 3-D energy-harvesting-aware
routing scheme for space nanosatellite networks,” IEEE Internet Things
J., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 2729–2740, Aug. 2018.
[23] R. Diana, E. Lochin, L. Franck, C. Baudoin, E. Dubois, and P. Gelard,
“DTN routing for quasi-deterministic networks with application to
LEO constellations,” Int. J. Satellite Commun. Netw., vol. 35, no. 2,
pp. 91–108, 2017.
[24] G. Araniti et al., “Contact graph routing in DTN space networks:
Overview, enhancements and performance,” IEEE Commun. Mag.,
vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 38–46, Mar. 2015.
[25] C. Caini and R. Firrincieli, “Application of contact graph routing to LEO
satellite DTN communications,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC),
Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2012, pp. 3301–3305.
[26] N. Bezirgiannidis, F. Tsapeli, S. Diamantopoulos, and V. Tsaoussidis,
“Towards flexibility and accuracy in space DTN communications,” in
Proc. 8th ACM MobiCom Workshop Challenged Netw. (CHANTS), 2013,
pp. 43–48.
[27] N. Bezirgiannidis, C. Caini, D. P. Montenero, M. Ruggieri, and
V. Tsaoussidis, “Contact graph routing enhancements for delay tolerant space communications,” in Proc. 7th Adv. Satellite Multimedia Syst.
Conf. 13th Signal Process. Space Commun. Workshop (ASMS/SPSC),
Livorno, Italy, 2014, pp. 17–23.
[28] E. J. Birrane, “Improving graph-based overlay routing in delay tolerant networks,” in Proc. IFIP Wireless Days (WD), Niagara Falls, ON,
Canada, 2011, pp. 1–6.
[29] E. Birrane, S. Burleigh, and N. Kasch, “Analysis of the contact graph
routing algorithm: Bounding interplanetary paths,” Acta Astronautica,
vol. 75, pp. 108–119, Jun./Jul. 2012.
[30] M. Marchese and F. Patrone, “A source routing algorithm based on
CGR for DTN-nanosatellite networks,” in Proc. Global Commun. Conf.
(GLOBECOM), Singapore, 2017, pp. 1–6.
[31] M. Marchese, F. Patrone, and M. Cello, “DTN-based nanosatellite architecture and hot spot selection algorithm for remote areas connection,”
IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 689–702, Jan. 2018.
[32] M. Marchese and F. Patrone, “Energy-aware routing algorithm for DTNnanosatellite networks,” in Proc. Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM),
Abu Dhabi, UAE, 2018, pp. 1–6.
[33] K. B. Chin et al., “Energy storage technologies for small satellite
applications,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 106, no. 3, pp. 419–428, Mar. 2018.
[34] K. Woellert, P. Ehrenfreund, A. J. Ricco, and H. Hertzfeld, “Cubesats:
Cost-effective science and technology platforms for emerging and
developing nations,” Adv. Space Res., vol. 47, no. 4, pp. 663–684, 2011.

[35] J. Lee, E. Kim, and K. G. Shin, “Design and management of satellite
power systems,” in Proc. IEEE 34th Real Time Syst. Symp., Vancouver,
BC, Canada, 2013, pp. 97–106.
[36] S. Nedevschi, L. Popa, G. Iannaccone, S. Ratnasamy, and D. Wetherall,
“Reducing network energy consumption via sleeping and rateadaptation,” in Proc. 5th USENIX Symp. Netw. Syst. Design Implement.
(NSDI), 2008, pp. 323–336.
[37] G. Miao, N. Himayat, and G. Y. Li, “Energy-efficient link adaptation
in frequency-selective channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 2,
pp. 545–554, Feb. 2010.
[38] G. Miao, N. Himayat, Y. G. Li, and A. Swami, “Cross-layer optimization
for energy-efficient wireless communications: A survey,” Wireless
Commun. Mobile Comput., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 529–542, 2009.
[39] D. Vallado, P. Crawford, R. Hujsak, and T. Kelso, “Revisiting spacetrack
report #3,” in Proc. AIAA/AAS Astrodynamics Specialist Conf. Exhibit,
2006, pp. 1–94.

Mario Marchese (Senior Member, IEEE) was
born in Genoa, Italy, in 1967. He received the
Laurea degree (cum laude) and the Ph.D. degree
in telecommunications from the University of
Genoa, Italy, in 1992 and 1997, respectively.
From 1999 to January 2005, he worked with the
Italian Consortium of Telecommunications (CNIT),
University of Genoa Research Unit, where he was
the head of the research. From February 2005 to
January 2016, he was an Associate Professor with
the University of Genoa, where he has been a
Full Professor since February 2016. He has authored the book Quality of
Service Over Heterogeneous Networks (Chichester, U.K.: Wiley, 2007), and
authored/coauthored more than 300 scientific works, including international
magazines, international conferences, and book chapters. His main research
activity concerns: networking, quality of service over heterogeneous networks,
software defined networking, satellite DTN and nano-satellite networks, and
networking security. He is a winner of the IEEE ComSoc Award 2008 Satellite
Communications Distinguished Service Award in “recognition of significant
professional standing and contributions in the field of satellite communications technology.” He was the Chair of the IEEE Satellite and Space
Communications Technical Committee from 2006 to 2008.

Fabio Patrone was born in Genoa, Italy, in 1988.
He received the bachelor’s and master’s degrees in
telecommunication engineering from the University
of Genoa in 2010 and 2013, respectively, and the
Ph.D. degree from Satellite Communications and
Networking Laboratory (SCNL) with a thesis on
routing and scheduling algorithms in satellite delay
and disruption tolerant networks. He is currently a
Postdoctoral Research Fellow with SCNL. His main
research activity involves satellite, vehicular, and
sensor networks. In particular, it concerns the design
of routing, scheduling, and congestion control algorithms and the employment of networking technologies, such as network function virtualization and
software-defined networking, for the integration of these networks with the
terrestrial infrastructure within the 5G ecosystem.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 20:00:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

