IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

10017

TRACE: A Graph-Constrained Transformer for
Communication-Efficient Distributed Routing
in LEO Constellations
Qiuchao Dai , Zhongyuan Jiang , Fanxuan Sun, Xinghua Li , Member, IEEE,
and Jianfeng Ma , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Large-scale Low Earth Orbit (LEO) constellations
often experience high node failure rates caused by dynamic
environmental factors (random failures), such as satellite maneuvers, or by cyber or physical attacks on critical nodes (targeted
attacks), which pose unique challenges for routing optimization.
Traditional algorithms such as Dijkstra suffer from limited
parallel scalability on GPUs due to irregular neighbor distributions, while deep learning methods lack generalization ability.
To address these challenges, we propose TRACE (Topology-aware
Routing via Adjacent-Constraint Encoding), a graph-constrained
Transformer architecture equipped with a cascaded multi-head
attention decoder for distributed dynamic routing in LEO
domains. To improve algorithm throughput and resilience against
random failures and targeted attacks, we further design NFD
(Navigator–Follower Distillation), a self-distillation framework
which enables each agent to learn routing policies from Monte
Carlo episodes. Furthermore, a hierarchical distributed routing
architecture is developed to extend the proposed method to
multi-domain scenarios. Simulation results demonstrate that
TRACE with NFD achieves near-optimal routing accuracy with
controllable inter-domain errors, while significantly improving
throughput compared with mainstream routing algorithms.
Index Terms—LEO constellations, distributed optimization,
dynamic networks, hierarchical routing, knowledge distillation.

Fig. 1. GEO-LEO coverage and cross-domain communication. (a) In an
orbital shell, LEO satellites covering UEs on the earth are also covered by
GEO satellites. (b) GEO satellites naturally divide the LEO constellation into
multiple domains, and UE1 have to transfer packets to UE2 across domains.

I. I NTRODUCTION
A. Background and Motivation

L

OW Earth Orbit satellite constellations are rapidly
becoming a key part of global communication systems,
offering wide coverage and low latency [1]. As shown in
Figure 1, a Geostationary Earth Orbit (GEO) satellite offers
Received 8 January 2026; revised 27 April 2026; accepted 27 May 2026.
Date of publication 9 June 2026; date of current version 18 June 2026.
This work was supported in part by the National Science and Technology
Major Project of China (Grant No. 2025ZD1303100), Natural Science Basic
Research Program of Shaanxi under Grant 2025JC-JCQN-085, and the
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities of China under
Grant QTZX26140. The associate editor coordinating the review of this
article and approving it for publication was J. Wang. (Corresponding author:
Zhongyuan Jiang.)
Qiuchao Dai, Fanxuan Sun, Xinghua Li, and Jianfeng Ma are with
the School of Cyber Engineering and the State Key Laboratory of
Integrated Services Networks, Xidian University, Xi’an, Shaanxi 710071,
China (e-mail: qiuchao@stu.xidian.edu.cn; fanxuansun@stu.xidian.edu.cn;
xhli1@mail.xidian.edu.cn; jfma@mail.xidian.edu.cn).
Zhongyuan Jiang is with the School of Cyber Engineering and the
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, Xidian University,
Xi’an, Shaanxi 710071, China, and also with Purple Mountain Laboratories,
Nanjing, Jiangsu 211111, China (e-mail: zyjiang@xidian.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2026.3701848

excellent coverage at high altitudes and can access to LEO
satellites through optical links [2]. In the GEO-LEO system,
the coverage of each GEO satellite naturally divides the
LEO constellation into multiple domains, where each domain
operates as an independent routing area [2]. User equipments
(UEs) transfer data to the corresponding LEO domain through
Ground Satellite Links (GSLs), and the data is forwarded
through intra-domain and inter-domain inter-satellite links
(ISLs). Prior studies show that GEO is better employed as
an extra traffic forwarder for intra-domain routing [3] due to
its relatively lower link capacity [4], [5].
However, LEO constellations experience two primary types
of node failures: random failures caused by space radiation,
dynamic ISLs, and energy constraints, and targeted attacks
on critical nodes [1]. These factors jointly result in highly
dynamic network topologies. Furthermore, the expansion of
constellation scale significantly complicates on-orbit maintenance, which exacerbates node failures. Consequently, routing
within the network becomes much more challenging than in
terrestrial systems.

0090-6778 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:52:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10018

These challenges jointly give rise to three fundamental
difficulties in routing: (i) frequent topology changes demand
adaptive decision-making; (ii) dynamic ISLs result in shrinking link availability windows, thereby requiring more efficient
routing computation; and (iii) larger constellation sizes call for
scalable architectures.
Survey papers show that LEO networks must frequently
reconfigure routing paths as topology changes [6]. Some
research [7] have tried to solve the problem through RL
(Reinforced Learning), but they also face the difficulty of
excessively long model convergence time after topological
changes.
Traditional routing methods such as Dijkstra’s algorithm
(and similar shortest-path approaches) assume relatively stable
networks and uniform node degrees [8]. On modern GPU hardware, however, their performance is limited when neighbor
sets vary widely. For instance, work on graph processing on
GPUs reports that irregular workloads and control flow hamper
effective parallelism [9].
Furthermore, centralized routing architectures cannot scale
with the growth of large LEO constellations, leading to excessive signaling and poor adaptability [8]. To cope with high
dynamic topologies and limited inter-satellite bandwidth, distributed routing architectures [7], [10] are increasingly adopted
to enable local autonomy and cooperative optimization among
satellites.
Based on these challenges and the limitations of existing
methods, we conclude that routing in large-scale, dynamic
LEO constellations requires three key advances.
• Adaptive: Routing algorithms must adapt to topology
changes and achieve near-optimal performance comparable to traditional algorithms.
• Efficient: The algorithm must be efficient enough to
take full advantage of many-core hardware without being
bottlenecked by synchronization or imbalance.
• Scalable: The routing architecture must be scalable to
large LEO constellations and remain highly stable.
B. Related Work
Existing routing approaches for LEO and dynamic networks
can be broadly categorized based on how they address the
three fundamental challenges identified in Section I, namely
adaptivity, efficiency, and scalability.
Scalability-oriented approaches. To improve routing scalability and reliability in large-scale constellations, several
studies focus on protocol-level and architectural designs.
Dui et al. [11] and Lai et al. [12] investigate topology perturbations from the perspectives of attack strategies and congestion
control, respectively, while Li et al. [2] and Du et al. [13]
enhance stability through hierarchical routing domains and
segmented resilient routing. These approaches aim to improve
system-level scalability and fault tolerance by organizing
large constellations into manageable structures. However, they
primarily rely on protocol and control-plane mechanisms,
with limited support for fast routing decision-making and
algorithmic scalability under highly dynamic topologies.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

Adaptivity-oriented approaches. With the rise of ubiquitous
intelligence in 6G, learning-based methods are increasingly
adopted to improve adaptivity in dynamic environments. Wu
and Huang [14] employs reinforcement learning for dynamic
ISL switching, while Zhou et al. [15] and Ran et al. [7] design
distributed routing strategies using PPO, POMDP, and graph
attention networks (GAT). Other works explore graph-based or
optimization-driven methods, such as GCN-based routing [16],
evolutionary multi-objective optimization [17], and continual
deep reinforcement learning [18]. In addition, recent studies
incorporate federated learning, generative AI, and mixture-ofexperts models to enhance distributed intelligence and resource
efficiency in NTN systems [19], [20], [21], [22], [23], [24],
[25], [26], [27], [28]. These approaches improve adaptability
to dynamic conditions through data-driven decision-making.
However, most of them focus on learning frameworks or
resource management rather than routing performance, and
often lack systematic analysis of real-time decision-making,
agent deployment, and scalability in large-scale LEO constellations.
Efficiency-oriented approaches. Classical shortest-path algorithms, such as Dijkstra and Bellman–Ford, provide efficient
routing solutions under known topology conditions. Uditi et al.
[29] and Jasika et al. [30] show that even with parallelization
techniques such as OpenMP or OpenCL, these algorithms
remain constrained by strong sequential dependencies. While
they can achieve optimal routing decisions when complete
and accurate topology information is available, their limited
parallel scalability and reliance on global state make them less
suitable for real-time routing in highly dynamic and large-scale
LEO networks.
In summary, existing approaches exhibit complementary
strengths but fail to simultaneously address the three key
requirements. Protocol-level methods improve scalability but
lack efficient decision-making; learning-based approaches
enhance adaptivity but often suffer from high inference
overhead or limited scalability; and classical algorithms provide efficiency under full information but are sensitive to
incomplete or outdated topology states. These limitations
motivate the need for a routing framework that achieves high
throughput, scalability, and robustness under dynamic and
resource-constrained LEO environments.
Compared with existing approaches, TRACE fundamentally
differs by integrating topology-aware representation learning
with a cascaded decision mechanism and a lightweight training framework, enabling both high-throughput inference and
robust routing under constrained synchronization.
C. Our Method
These three requirements motivate us to propose TRACE
(Topology-aware Routing via Adjacent-Constraint Encoding)
and NFD (Navigator–Follower Distillation). To address the
adaptive and efficient requirements, TRACE leverages a
Transformer architecture with adjacency-constrained attention, which naturally supports parallel decision-making over
irregular graph structures while preserving local connectivity
constraints. This design enables scalable and generalizable

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:52:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DAI et al.: TRACE: A GRAPH-CONSTRAINED TRANSFORMER

routing under dynamic LEO topologies. To enhance robustness
under failures and obtain a better-performing model, NFD
introduces a self-distillation mechanism that combines Monte
Carlo exploration with policy learning, allowing the training
process to capture the relative quality of candidate routing
actions beyond ground-truth, thereby improving resilience to
random failures and targeted attacks. We also design a hierarchical distributed routing architecture to scale from a single
domain to multi-domain constellations. The results show that
TRACE with NFD consistently achieves near-optimal routing
accuracy, maintains control over inter-domain errors, and
significantly improves throughput compared with mainstream
routing solutions. The main contributions are as follows.
• Generalizable: We develop a graph-constrained Transformer for routing that embeds adjacency constraints
directly into the attention mechanism, enabling robust and
generalizable dynamic routing in LEO constellations.
• High-throughput: We design a distillation-based training
mechanism (NFD) that allows agents to learn routing
policies under failure scenarios through Monte Carlo
exploration and feedback, which achieves higher throughput compared with mainstream algorithms.
• Distributed: We propose a hierarchical distributed
routing framework to extend the approach from a singledomain case to multi-domain environments and validate
its performance through simulation.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section II presents the system model and problem formulation;
Section III details the proposed TRACE and NFD methods;
Section IV reports experimental results and analysis; finally,
Section V concludes our work.
II. S YSTEM M ODEL AND P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
In this section, we first introduce the network topology
and communication model under two types of node failures
(i.e., random failures and targeted attacks), followed by a
GEO optical link allocation scheme to enhance the network
resilience. We then propose a hierarchical multi-domain distributed routing framework and formulate the corresponding
problem. Finally, we give the detailed distributed routing
workflow at each satellite node.
A. Network Topology and Communication Model
Assume that the LEO satellites S = {1, 2, . . ., S} is divided
by GEO into K domains, i.e., K = {1, 2, . . ., K}, as shown in
Figure 1 (b). The intra-domain satellites form a classic mesh
topology as shown in Figure 2. Then the k-th domain can
be expressed as a graph Gk = (Vk , Ek ), where Vk is the set
of intra-domain satellites, Ek is the set of intra-domain ISLs.
Above single domains, there is a graph Ginter = (K, Einter )
describing the overall topology, where Einter denotes the interdomain ISLs.
For i, j ∈ S, if there is an optical link (i.e., ISL) between i
and j, the SN R (Single-to-Noise Ratio) is approximated by
(1):
CP
,
(1)
SN Ri,j =
ρBd2i,j

10019

Fig. 2. GEO optical links allocation against targeted attacks and random
failures.

where P is the transmission power, C is a constant related to
channel gain, di,j ∼ N (d, σd2 ) is the satellite distance, ρ is the
noise density, and B is the bandwidth. The transmission delay
p
c
Ti,j
and propagation delay Ti,j
can be obtained by (2):
c
Ti,j
= κ/Ri,j ,

(2a)

p
Ti,j
= di,j /c,

(2b)

where κ is the size of the transmitted packet data, Ri,j =
Blog(1 + SN Ri,j ) refers to the transmission rate, and c is the
light speed.
Apart from the transmission and propagationPdelays, the
queueing delay is also considered. Let µj =
i∈N (j) Rj,i
denote the aggregate outgoing service rate of node j, where
N (j) indicates the neighbors of node j. For tractability, we
adopt a Markovian queueing approximation, which is widely
used for communication-network delay modeling [31], [32].
Specifically, the traffic arrival rate is set as λj = ηµj , where
0 < η < 1 is the traffic load factor and η = 0.5 is used in this
paper.
Since the focus of this work is routing decision rather than
fine-grained traffic modeling, the queue delay is modeled by
a truncated exponential random variable:
Qj = min{Q̃j , Qmax },

Q̃j ∼ Exp(1/Q̄j ),

(3)

where Qmax is the maximum queue capacity and Q̄j denotes
the average queue backlog. Then, the queueing delay at node
j is given by (3)
Tjq = Qj /µj .

(4)

This exponential assumption provides a lightweight baseline
queueing model. Although more bursty traffic can be described
by more complex models, such as ON/OFF or Markovmodulated processes, the proposed routing framework only
requires the resulting link-delay matrix as input and can be
extended by replacing Qj with other traffic distributions.
The above described communication model represents the
general case, while in certain special scenarios, nodes may face
two kinds of potential failures. As shown in Figure 2, node
failures may be caused by satellite maneuvers and targeted

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:52:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10020

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

attacks. Considering node failures, the delay Ti,j for packet
data transmission from i to j is given by (5):
(
+∞,
node j inaccessible
(5)
Ti,j =
p
c
Ti,j
+ Ti,j
+ Tjq , otherwise.

Given the constellation topology Ginter , and a routing
request req = (src, dst, κ) from src ∈ Vksrc to dst ∈ Vkdst ,
we denote a valid inter-domain route path by (9):

1) Random Failure: Satellites have to maneuver drastically
to avoid possible collisions [2], which may lead to the
interruption of ISLs. In this case, we assume that each
satellite performs orbital maneuvers and fails with equal
probability prand . The random node failure probability
prand
can be expressed as (6):
j

where k0 = ksrc , kT = kdst , T = |pinter
req |, and kt ∈ N (kt−1 ).

prand
= prand , j ∈ S.
j

(6)

2) Targeted Attacks: Attackers may adopt attacks like
DDoS or Jamming to target critical satellite nodes, causing link disruption or severe degradation. In this case, we
assume that the probability of a node being attacked is
proportional to its impact on the algebraic connectivity.
If we denote alg(·) as the algebraic connectivity and
Gk−j = (Vk \ {j}, Ek \ {ekij |i ∈ N (j)}), the node failure
probability ptar
under targeted attacks can be expressed
j
as (7):
alg(Gk ) − alg(Gk−j )
, j ∈ Vk .
−i
i∈Vk (alg(Gk ) − alg(Gk ))

ptar
=P
j

(7)

As is depicted in Figure 2, the GEO satellite is introduced
to enhance the network resilience against node failures. By
allocating optical links, GEO satellites relay traffic for LEO
domains, providing additional connectivity. The routing decisions are performed by LEO satellites in a distributed manner
based on local topology information, while GEO–LEO optical
links are treated as optional relay paths when available.
However, the number of allocable links for GEO satellites
is limited, and attackers can also attack GEO satellites through
LEO nodes. Therefore, to reduce the workload of GEO satellites and maximize the connectivity of LEO domains, we adopt
the allocation strategy proposed in [33]. The number of optical
links Ak to be allocated to the k-th domain can be denoted
by (8):
nj
k
o
2
Ak = min A · |Vk | 3 , |Vk | − 1 ,
(8)
where A is a constant related to the average degree of the
LEO network.
In this paper, we allocate GEO optical links in descending
order of LEO node algebraic connectivity. After the allocation,
Gk achieves improved resilience against node failures.
B. Multi-Domain Distributed Routing Problem Formulation
We propose a hierarchical distributed architecture for multidomain routing, Figure 3 shows the overall framework. The
distributedly deployed agents share the same model parameters
with a prototype, and are responsible for both inter-domain
routing and intra-domain routing. It is worth noting that the
agents are only deployed to on-orbit Base Stations (BSs)
or gateway satellites to save the computing power of LEO
domains. Through hierarchical routing, the constellation routing among S nodes is reduced to K intra-domain routing and
one inter-domain routing computation.

pinter
req = [k0 , k1 , . . ., kt , . . ., kT ], kt ∈ K,

(9)

It is worth noting that the source node srckt of domain kt
is only related to kt−1 , 1 ≤ t ≤ T , and the destination node
dstkt is only related to kt+1 , 0 ≤ t ≤ T − 1. In addition,
srck0 = src and dstkT = dst.
In real LEO constellations, domain k and k + 1 may be
connected by multiple ISLs. In other words, hk, k + 1i cannot
be mapped one-to-one to a specific ISL. However, this can
be reduced to the single-ISL case by introducing auxiliary
domains. In particular, the i-th edge of hk, k + 1i can be
converted into hk, kiaux i and hkiaux , k + 1i, where kiaux is an
empty domain, and any data entering kiaux will be immediately
forwarded to domain k + 1 without processing. For ease of
performance evaluation, we assume that kiaux is not an empty
domain; that is, all K domains crossed by a packet correspond
to a real single-domain topology.
Similarly, given the topology Gkt of the kt -th domain we
denote a valid intra-domain route path by (10):
t
pkreq
= [v0kt , v1kt , . . ., vτkt , . . ., vTkt ], vτkt ∈ Vkt ,

(10)

t
|, and vτkt ∈
where v0kt = srckt , vTkt = dstkt , T = |pkreq
kt
N (vτ −1 ). By combining (9) and (10), the overall route preq
can be obtained as (11):
t
1
0
T
. . . ⊕ pkreq
, kt ∈ pinter
. . . ⊕ pkreq
⊕ pkreq
preq = pkreq
req , (11)

where ⊕ means the ordered concatenation of two sequences.
Then the communication delay D is denoted by (12):
X
D(preq ) =
Ti,j .
(12)
[i,j]⊆preq

Actually, the routing process is a Markov Decision Process
(MDP), where each hop is determined by the distributed
agents. The agents achieve implicit consensus by sharing
parameters, where π is the routing policy, θ and φ are the
parameters for inter and intra domain routing respectively.
The probability of the action performed by the agent
to choose kt is only related to the input sate sinter
=
t
hkt−1 , kdst , Ginter i, and the inter-domain routing policy πθ
with parameters θ, i.e., p(kt |sinter
; θ) = πθt (kt ). Similarly,
t
τ kt
;
φ)
=
π
(v
we have p(vτkt |sintra
τ
φ τ ). To ensure consistency,
0
0 kt
we define πθ (k0 ) = 1 and πφ (v0 ) = 1. Then, the inter and
intra domain path probability can be written uniformly as (13).
πparam (p|s) =

|p|
Y

i
πparam
(p(i) ),

(13)

i=0

where s is the initial state, p is the output path, param is θ
or φ, and p(i) is the i-th node in the path.
Finally, we formulate the distributed routing problem as P,
where E[·] represents the expectation under node failures, random routing requests, and different constellation topologies.
P: min E[D(preq )]
θ,φ

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:52:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DAI et al.: TRACE: A GRAPH-CONSTRAINED TRANSFORMER

10021

Fig. 3. Distributed routing framework. Distributed agents deployed to on-orbit BSs or gateway nodes, share the inter-domain and intra-domain routing
parameters with the Prototype model. Packets from UE1 are routed through LEO domains A, B, and C to reach UE2.

s.t. |preq ∩ {dst}| = 1,

(14a)

D(preq ) < +∞,

(14b)

|pkreq | ≤ H, ∀ k ∈ pinter
req ,

(14c)

(j)
p(i)
req 6= preq , ∀ i 6= j.

(14d)

Among the constraints, (14a) guarantees that the packet can
be transferred to the destination; (14b) ensures that the path
contains no failed nodes and conforms to the graph constraints;
(14c) defines the maximum hop limit H in a single domain;
(14d) enforces a loop-free path.
C. Multi-Domain Distributed Routing Workflow
We next give the detailed workflow in each satellite in the
proposed distributed routing framework. The overall workflow
is divided into two planes, i.e., a decision plane and a forwarding plane. The decision plane operates through distributed
agents, while the forwarding plane is executed by satellite
routers. It is worth noting that each satellite is equipped with
a router, but not all of them have agents deployed. Routing
decisions are triggered only at nodes equipped with agents,
while other nodes follow forwarding instructions provided by
previous decisions.
1) Decision plane: User packets enter LEO domains
through GSLs or inter-domain ISLs, where the entry
points are on-orbit BSs or satellite gateways deployed
with agents. The agent will first compute the interdomain route to deliver the packet to the destination
LEO domain. According to the inter-domain route, the
agent then computes the intra-domain route to deliver
the packet to the gateway or the destination within the
domain. In normal scenarios, the inter-domain route
is typically computed once by the first agent encountered when the packet enters the LEO constellation,

and reused across domains unless significant topology
changes are detected, while the intra-domain route is
calculated by agents deployed at gateways in a distributed manner each time the packet enters a new
domain. In abnormal scenarios, inter-domain and intradomain route calculations may fail due to node failures.
In such cases, upon detecting routing failure or topology
inconsistency, the agent attempts to synchronize the
inter-domain or intra-domain graph with neighboring
nodes and recomputes the route. If the number of
attempts exceeds the limit, the packet is finally dropped.
Overall, routing proceeds iteratively across domains:
once a packet reaches a domain boundary, the next
domain is determined by the inter-domain route, and
intra-domain routing is recomputed locally, until the
destination domain is reached.
2) Forwarding plane: According to the route provided
by the agent, under normal conditions, the router first
checks whether the current node is the destination node.
If so, the packet is directly delivered. Then, the router
verifies whether the total hop count of the packet exceeds
the limit; if it does, the packet is dropped. Finally, the
router forwards the packet to the next-hop node. Under
abnormal conditions (sudden node failures), the next hop
may be inaccessible. In this case, the router buffers the
packet and broadcasts a command to agents to restart the
inter-domain or intra-domain routing computation and
return the result. Since the route and control messages
are much smaller than data packets and incur limited
communication overhead, they are assumed to have a
higher delivery reliability compared with data traffic.
III. P ROPOSED M ETHDODOLOGY
In this section, we first introduce the embedding of the input
routing requests. We then describe the TRACE architecture,

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:52:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10022

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

Fig. 4. The TRACE architecture. Node embeddings and graph relations are used respectively as the encoder input and as hard constraints in the attention
computation, where all multi-head attentions in the proposed TRACE are computed under these graph constraints. The decoder’s query vector is constructed
by concatenating the features of the current node, the destination node, and the global state.

including the detailed design of the encoder and decoder.
Finally, we propose the NFD framework to train a more
efficient model.
A. Graph-Constrained Transformer Encoder
The inter-domain routing and intra-domain routing models
share the same neural network architecture as shown in
Figure 4. Taking the routing problem in a single domain
with nodes set V = {1, . . ., m} as an example, its topology
is G = (V, E). The inputs are G and the corresponding
communication delay [Ti,j ]m×m ∈ Rm×m , source node src,
and destination node dst. With these inputs, the i-th node input
embedding xi can be denoted by (15).
xi = [I(i = src), f (Ti,1 ), . . ., f (Ti,m ), I(i = dst)], (15)
where I(condition) is the indicator function, I(condition) =
1 if condition is true, otherwise, I(condition) = 0. f (x) =
min{x, Tmax } is a truncation function, where Tmax denotes
the maximum response delay.
The propagation delay in LEO constellations exhibits a
high dynamic range due to varying inter-satellite distances and
dynamic link conditions. Directly using raw delay values may
lead to unbalanced feature distributions and hinder effective
model training. Therefore, the truncation function f (x) is
introduced to compress large delay values while preserving
relative differences among smaller values, which are more
critical for routing decisions. This type of feature scaling is
widely adopted in graph representation learning and neural
network models to improve numerical stability and training
efficiency [34], [35].
The overall input features x = [x1 , x2 , . . ., xm ] ∈
Rm×(m+2) are embedded in dx dimension features through a
fully-connected layer (FC) before they are fed into the encoder
blocks as denoted in (16).
(0)
xi = LN (xi W0 + b),

(16)

where LN (·) represents layer normalization, W0 ∈
R(m+2)×dx and b ∈ Rdx are learnable parameters. In the

following, we denote the output of the l-th encoder block
(l)
(l)
(l)
as x(l) = [x1 , . . ., xm ], xi ∈ Rdx . Then the input of the
encoder is x(0) , while the output is x(L) .
Figure 4 shows the details of multi-head attention (MHA)
block, which takes Q, K and V as input. If we define the
feature dimension dv of each head, then the number of heads
E = dx /dv . For a single head, the Q, K, V can be denoted
by (17):
Q = x(l−1) Wq , K = x(l−1) Wk , V = x(l−1) Wv ,

(17)

where Wq , Wk and Wv ∈ Rdx ×dv are all learnable
parameters.
Figure 4 illustrates the differences between our encoder
and the Transformer. Unlike the positional encoding in Transformer, which emphasizes temporal correlations, graph optimization problems focus more on the relationships between
nodes, represented by the constraint matrix C = [cij ]m×m ,
where cij = −∞ if Ti,j = +∞, otherwise, cij = 0. It is worth
noting that TRACE is not a generic graph-based Transformer
model. In existing graph Transformer architectures (e.g., GTN
[36]), attention mechanisms are typically used to learn latent
relationships or augment node representations. In contrast,
TRACE treats attention as a constrained decision operator,
where the adjacency constraint matrix explicitly restricts attention computation to feasible routing neighbors. This design
ensures that all attention operations are inherently aligned
with routing feasibility, rather than relying on the model to
implicitly learn graph connectivity.
By imposing graph constraints, the attention coefficient
matrix U ∈ Rm×m can be calculated with sof tmax activation
function by (18).
p
(18)
U = sof tmax[C + (QK T )/ dv ].
With attention coefficient matrices Ue and value matrices
Ve from all heads {1, . . ., E}, the output of the MHA block
can be calculated by (19):
output = (||E
e=1 Ue Ve ) · W1 ,

(19)

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:52:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DAI et al.: TRACE: A GRAPH-CONSTRAINED TRANSFORMER

10023

where W1 ∈ Rdx ×dx is a learnable matrix, || denotes the
concatenation operation.
Through residual connection and layer normalization, we
obtain x̂(l) = LN (output + x(l−1) ). The computed result is
then fed into the feed-forward network (FFN), which consists
of a ReLU activation and two FC layers, i.e., learnable
matrices W2 ∈ Rdx ×2dx and W3 ∈ R2dx ×dx . Finally, a
residual connection and layer normalization are applied to
obtain the encoder output x(l) . The detailed calculation is
shown in (20).
x(l) = LN [ReLU (x̂(l) W2 ) · W3 + x̂(l) ].

(20)

Fig. 5. The navigator-follower distillation framework.

B. Cascaded Mult-Head Attention Decoder
As shown in Figure 4, we employ a cascaded attention decoder similar to the structure proposed in [37],
which enables Transformer-based models to output sequences
with non-fixed length. Unlike standard Transformer decoders
designed for sequence generation, the proposed cascaded
attention decoder is specifically designed for step-wise routing
decisions, leveraging task-conditioned query embeddings and
enforcing strict feasibility constraints. Specifically, the MHA
module first performs a coarse exploration over candidate nexthop nodes from multiple representation subspaces, while the
subsequent single-head attention module refines this distribution to produce a more precise decision. This two-stage design
enables more effective selection of next-hop nodes in highly
dynamic graph environments, where both exploration and finegrained discrimination are required.
Suppose that the output of the decoder is a route path p =
[v1 , . . ., vτ , vm ]. The decoder block at time step τ, 2 ≤ τ ≤
m takes x(L) , vτ −1 , and dst as inputs, and outputs the hop
decision vτ . To ensure consistency, we define the output of
the decoder at the first time step v1 = src.
To distinguish it from the encoder, we use f = [f1 , . . ., fm ]
instead of x(L) to denote the node feature embedding in the
decoder. Then the input q, K d , V d of the MHA in the τ -th
decoder block (2 ≤ τ ≤ m) can be calculated by (21):
qτ = queryτ · Wqd , K d = f Wkd , V d = f Wvd ,

(21)

where Wqd , Wkd and Wvd ∈ Rdx ×dv are all learnable parameters. It is worth mentioning that K d and V d are computed
only once in the first decoder block and kept fixed afterward.
queryτ = (fvτ −1 ||fdst ||f¯) is used to describe the current
routing problem, where fvτ −1 is the current
Pm node feature, fdst
1
is the dst node feature, and f¯ = m
i=1 fi represents the
graph topology.
Then, the attention vector uτ ∈ Rm can be calculated by
(22):
p
uτ = sof tmax[M askτ + (qτ K T )/ dv ],
(22)
where M askt = [b1 (τ ), . . ., bi (τ ), . . ., bm (τ )], and bi (τ ) is
given as (23). M askτ not only ensures that the path is loopfree as (14d), but also guarantees that the selected next-hop
node conforms to the graph constraints.
(
−∞, i ∈
/ N (vτ −1 ) or ∃τ 0 < τ, vτ 0 = i.
bi (τ ) =
(23)
0, otherwise.

Similarly, we give the MHA output in the τ -th decoder
block as (24).
τ d
d
outputτ = (||E
e=1 ue Ve ) · W1 ,

(24)

where W1d ∈ Rdx ×dx is a learnable matrix, uτe and Ved are
the attention coefficient vector and the value matrix from
head e respectively. Then outputτ is fed into the single-head
attention block as a more detailed query vector. Since singlehead attention is a special case of MHA with E = 1 as (21),
we do not elaborate on its computation process. Instead, its
operation is defined through the function sha(·). Finally we
have the output of the τ -th decoder block as (25).
πφτ = sof tmax[sha(outputτ )],

(25)

where vτ ∼ πφτ (vτ ), and p ∼ πφ (p|s), s = hsrc, dst, Gi.
vτ is selected by random sampling during training, whereas a
greedy strategy is used during inference. The decoding process
terminates when vτ = dst.
This cascaded attention mechanism differs from conventional decoding strategies by explicitly separating candidate
exploration and decision refinement, rather than directly generating outputs in a single attention step.
C. Navigator-Follower Distillation Mechanism
To discover high-quality routing paths, DRL-based
approaches typically rely on repeated environment interactions
and policy updates. Prior studies have pointed out that, in
wireless network control problems, DRL often faces slow
convergence and performance instability [38], [39]. However,
routing in LEO constellations is not a purely trial-and-error
problem. For a given topology, high-quality routing paths
can be efficiently obtained using classical algorithms such as
Dijkstra, which provide strong supervision signals.
Motivated by this observation, we propose the
Navigator–Follower Distillation (NFD) framework, which
integrates ground-truth supervision with Monte Carlo-based
policy evaluation to achieve efficient and stable routing policy
learning.
We train both the inter-domain and intra-domain routing
models under the NFD framework to enhance their generalization capability. In the following, we will use the intra-domain
model as an example to illustrate the training and inference
process. As shown in Figure 5, the NFD framework consists

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:52:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10024

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

of two major parts, one part is to calculate the study loss, the
other part is to calculate the knowledge distillation (KD) loss.
Intuitively, the study loss and the KD loss play complementary roles. The study loss provides supervision from
ground-truth paths and ensures that the model learns valid
routing trajectories. In contrast, the KD loss leverages Monte
Carlo episodes to evaluate the relative quality of candidate next
hops, enabling the model to capture fine-grained differences
between hops that cannot be distinguished by ground truth
alone.
The study loss is consistent with the standard teacherstudent distillation framework, which is a supervised loss funcg
]
tion. Given the ground-truth path pg = [v1g , . . ., vτg , . . ., vm
for a routing request req in graph G, the study loss LSL can
be computed through the discounted likelihood function, as
derived in (26)
LSL (pg ; φ) =

m
X

γ τ −2 ln πφτ (vτg ),

(26)

τ =2

where 0 < γ < 1 is a discount factor, which enables the model
to capture the dependency between hop decisions.
However, the study loss does not enable the agent to
perceive the correctness of each hop. Even if two hops on
the same path are both consistent with the ground truth, such
a supervised learning–based loss function cannot capture their
respective contributions to the total delay. Therefore, we adopt
a self-distillation approach to compute the KD loss, where one
follower and N navigators work in parallel.
Unlike standard DRL paradigms, NFD decouples trajectory
generation from model optimization, rather than learning policies through coupled actor–critic updates or policy-gradient
optimization. The navigators perform Monte Carlo sampling
to estimate action-quality information in a lightweight manner,
which avoids the need for value-function approximation and
repeated bootstrapped updates commonly required in DRL
methods.
Algorithm 1 Q-Table Calulating With Monte Carlo Episodes
Input: routing case s; parameters φ̃; discount factor γ; navigators number N .
Initialization: Q ← 0, C ← 0.
for i = 1, . . ., N do
sum ← 0
the i-th navigator sample M Ci ∼ πφ̃ (M Ci |s)
for j = |M Ci |, . . ., 2 do
MC
MC
u ← vi,j−1
, v ← vi,j
sum ← γ · sum − D(u, v)
Cu,v ← Cu,v + 1
sum−Q
Qu,v ← Qu,v + Cu,v u,v
end for
end for
Output: Q
During the NFD training procedure, the follower shares the
parameters φ̃ from the previous epoch with navigators. The
navigators generates N Monte Carlo episodes by stochastic
sampling and uses them to estimate the Q-table Q(s; φ̃) ∈

RV ×V , where s = hreq, Gi. We define the i-th Monte Carlo
MC
MC
, . . .], the Q-table can be
, vi,2
episode as M Ci = [vi,1
calculated by Algorithm 1.
It is reasonable to assume that a next hop with a larger Qvalue should be more likely to be selected, i.e., the selection
τ +1
probability πQ
(vτ +1 ) = P
q

routing path is p
KD loss by (27):

exp[Qvτ ,vτ +1 (s;φ̃)]
j∈N (vτ ) exp[Qvτ ,j (s;φ̃)]

. If the Q-

q
], we can compute the
= [v1q , . . ., vτq , . . ., vm

LKD (pq ; φ) =

m
X

τ
γ τ −2 KL(πQ
||πφτ ),

(27)

τ =2

P
π τ (j)
τ
τ
where KL(πQ
||πφτ ) = j∈N (vq ) πQ
(j) · ln πQτ (j) denotes
τ −1
φ
the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence.
We finally update the parameter φ by (28), where lr is the
learning rate, and α1 , α2 > 0, α1 + α2 = 1,
φ = φ + lr · α1 Ep∼πφ (p|s) [∇φ LSL (p; φ)]
+ lr · α2 Ep∼πQ (p|s) [∇φ LKD (p; φ)].

(28)

Algorithm 2 NFD Training Procedure
Input: number of epochs Epochs; steps per epoch Steps;
batch size B; dataset data; navigators number N ; learning
rate lr; parameters φ; discount factor γ; loss function
coefficient α1 , α2 .
Initialization: Orthogonal initialization θ, φ; set φ̃ as uniformly sampling; Qi = 0, ∀si ∈ data.
Navigators:
wait for new φ̃
for si ∈ data do
perform Algorithm 1 and update Qi
end for
Follower:
for epoch = 1, . . . , Epochs do
for step = 1, . . . , Steps do
select si ∈ data, ∀1 ≤ i ≤ B
get pgi precomputed via Dijkstra’s algorithm
compute pqi with Qi via Q-routing
compute LSL (pgi ; φ) via (26)
compute LKD (pqi ; φ) via (27)
φ ← φ + lr · B1 ∇φ [α1 LSL + α2 LKD ]
end for
φ̃ ← φ, send φ̃ to navigators
end for
Output: φ
The detailed NFD training procedure for multi-domain
routing is shown as Algorithm 2, where data denotes the
training dataset constructed as described in Section IV-A. In
addition, the expectations mentioned in (28) are approximated
via batch sampling.
To further analyze the computational characteristics of
different training paradigms, we summarize their training
complexity in Table I. In Table I, Steps denotes the number of
training iterations per epoch, and B is the batch size. L̄ represents the average routing path length, and N is the number of
navigators used in the NFD framework. Cf and Cb denote the

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:52:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DAI et al.: TRACE: A GRAPH-CONSTRAINED TRANSFORMER

10025

TABLE I
T RAINING C OMPLEXITY C OMPARISON

forward and backward computation cost of the neural model,
respectively. Ep denotes the number of optimization epochs
in PPO for each batch of collected samples. The ground-truth
(GT) paths are precomputed using Dijkstra’s algorithm and
are not included in the training complexity.
For supervised learning (SUP), the training cost is dominated by the forward and backward propagation of the neural
model, resulting in a complexity of O(StepsB(Cf + Cb )).
For the proposed NFD framework, the overall training cost
consists of the follower-side optimization and the navigatorside evaluation. The follower optimization has the same order
as SUP, i.e., O(StepsB(Cf + Cb )), while the navigator
component introduces an additional cost of O(StepsB L̄N )
for Monte Carlo trajectory sampling and Q-table estimation.
Therefore, the total complexity of NFD can be written as
O(StepsB(Cf + Cb + L̄N )).
For PPO, the training complexity includes both trajectory
sampling and iterative policy optimization. The sampling
stage incurs a cost of O(StepsBCf ), while the collected
samples are further processed through Ep optimization epochs,
leading to an additional cost of O(Ep · StepsB(Cf + Cb )).
Thus, the overall complexity of PPO can be expressed as
O(StepsB(Cf + Ep (Cf + Cb ))), which is dominated by the
repeated optimization term when Ep > 1.
Compared with PPO, NFD avoids repeated inner-loop optimization over the same batch of data and instead introduces
a lightweight navigator-side evaluation mechanism. Furthermore, the follower optimization and navigator-side evaluation
can be executed in parallel in practice, which reduces the
overall wall-clock overhead. As a result, NFD provides a more
efficient and stable training process, particularly under highly
dynamic routing conditions, which is further reflected in the
faster convergence and improved performance observed in the
experimental results.

TABLE II
PARAMETERS

100-node routing models are trained and validated on a
server with the Ubuntu 20.04 operating system, equipped
with 256GB of memory, an Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 5218
CPU, and two NVIDIA RTX4090 GPUs; while 50-node and
30-node routing models are trained and validated on a PC with
the Windows 11 operating system, equipped with 64GB of
memory, an AMD Ryzen 9 9950×3D CPU, and one NVIDIA
RTX 5080 GPU. Table II shows the detailed hyperparameters.
Figure 6 shows the examples of D30, D50, D100, and
C20, where yellow nodes are the source nodes, red nodes
are the destination nodes, gray nodes are the failed nodes,
and the green arrows depict the valid paths. The average
degree of LEO satellites in D30, D50 and D100 are set
to 4 corresponding to the mesh topology, while it is set
to 8 in C20. Moreover, we set the maximum node failure
percentage pmax
f ail = 0.382 (where the actual failure percentage
follows a uniform distribution, i.e., pf ail ∼ U (0, pmax
f ail )), and
the node failure mode to Targeted Attack during training,
while the other possible values of pmax
f ail and the Random
Failure mode are evaluated during inference. Since it is nearly
impossible for all gateway nodes to fail simultaneously, C20
typically involves only edge failures. To enhance the interdomain routing model’s performance, edge failures in C20
are generated based on ground-truth path lengths from 1 to
20, where no edge fails in ground-truth paths.

IV. E XPERIMENTS AND N UMERICAL R ESULTS
A. Experimental Setup

B. Baselines

We train our routing models under three different singledomain network scales: D100 (100-node domain), D50
(50-node domain), and D30 (30-node domain). We further
construct a 20-domain LEO constellation topology, denoted
as C20. We generate the datasets accordingly: the D100
and D50 datasets each contain 512,000 training samples and
10,000 validation samples; the D30 dataset contains 256,000
training samples and 5,000 validation samples; and the C20
dataset includes 128,000 training samples and 2,500 validation
samples. We adopt the LEO constellation parameters that come
from or are derived from [19], [40], [41], [42], which are
detailed in Table II.

As shown in Table III, we evaluate the proposed NFD and
TRACE against several commonly used baselines. The deterministic group includes Dijkstra and ∆-stepping [43]. Both
offer exact shortest-path results, but their scalability is limited,
and only ∆-stepping supports partial parallel execution. For
heuristic search, we consider Limited Discrepancy Search
(LDS) [44], which explores a restricted discrepancy space
and serves as a lightweight inference method. The learningbased group includes Graph Transformer Network (GTN) [36],
GAT [45], and TRACE, all of which use topology-aware
representations and provide strong baselines for dynamic routing. For training schemes, we further compare three setups:

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:52:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10026

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

Fig. 6. Examples of samples in datasets. (a) An example of D30. (b) An examples of D50. (c) An example of D100. (d) An example of C20.

TABLE III
BASELINES

TABLE IV
T RAINING R ESULTS

semi-supervised NFD, reinforcement-learning PPO [46], and
supervised SUP. This setup provides a balanced view across
the mainstream algorithms.
C. Metrics
In our evaluation, we assess the proposed methods from
four perspectives. First, we measure the packet loss rate to
capture the impact of routing decisions under node failures.
Second, we evaluate end-to-end latency, which reflects the
efficiency of the computed paths. Third, we report algorithm
throughput, defined as the number of routing requests the
model can process per second. Finally, we quantify reliability
using the ratio between the algorithm’s delivery success rate
and the ground-truth delivery rate. These metrics jointly reflect
optimality, efficiency, and resilience under large-scale and
highly dynamic LEO constellations.
D. Training Methods Comparison
In this experiment, we compare the trained TRACE models
with different training methods. To enhance the validity of the
conclusions, we compare four configurations: NFD-4 (trained
with NFD and a 4-layer encoder), PPO-6 (trained with PPO
and a 6-layer encoder), SUP-4 (trained with SUP and a
4-layer encoder), and SUP-6 (trained with SUP and a 6-layer
encoder).
The overall results presented in Table IV show the average
delay (in ms) and loss rate (in %) for each model under these
two scenarios, validated on the D100 dataset and pmax
f ail = 0.5.
We observe that NFD-4 outperforms the other models in both
random failure and targeted attack scenarios, with the lowest
delay of 240.29 ms and the lowest loss rate of 6.83% under

Fig. 7. Validation accuracy over epochs for TRACE through different training
methods.

random failures, and a delay of 1018.31 ms and a loss rate
of 43.64% under targeted attacks. In comparison, SUP-6 and
SUP-4 have slightly higher delays and loss rates, while PPO-6
shows the highest values across both metrics.
Comparing NFD-4 with SUP-4, it is evident that NFD
achieves a better routing strategy with the same parameter scale. Comparing NFD-4 with SUP-6, NFD enables
a model with fewer parameters to achieve performance
that is comparable to, or even exceeds, that of a
larger model. A comprehensive comparison of NFD-4,
SUP-6, and PPO-6 shows that as a semi-supervised method,
NFD combines the reward feedback from reinforcement
learning and the ground truth guidance from supervised
learning, making it more effective in training optimal
parameters.
Figure 7 shows the training curves for the four training
methods, where the y-axis represents the accuracy, defined
as the delay of the true path divided by the delay of the
model’s output path. Notably, due to the differences in the loss

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:52:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DAI et al.: TRACE: A GRAPH-CONSTRAINED TRANSFORMER

10027

Fig. 8. Performance evaluation of the trained models under random failures and targeted attacks. (a) and (b) are the delay and loss rate comparisons of
different training methods under random failures, while (c) and (d) are the comparisons under targeted attacks.

functions used by the four methods, we do not use the loss
value as the y-axis. From the figure, it can be seen that
all four methods converge. In terms of convergence results,
NFD-4 and SUP-6 achieve the highest accuracy, followed by
PPO-6 and SUP-4, which is consistent with the results in
Table IV. In terms of convergence speed, NFD-4 achieves the
fastest convergence, thanks to its self-distillation framework.
SUP-6, with its larger parameter scale, converges next, as it
can learn from the ground truth more quickly. SUP-4, despite
having ground truth guidance, cannot fully fit the optimal
parameter distribution due to its limited parameters. PPO-6,
lacking ground truth guidance, converges the slowest, with its
curve showing a stepwise pattern due to the need for path
exploration.
Figure 8 presents inference results under random failures
and targeted attacks, with respect to 0 ≤ pmax
f ail ≤ 1. Figure 8 (a) and Figure 8 (b) show the performance under random
failures. As pmax
f ail increases, the delay and loss rate for all
methods rise. NFD-4 and SUP-6 maintain the lowest delay
and loss rate across the entire range, demonstrating superior
resilience to failure. In contrast, PPO-6 and SUP-4 exhibit
significantly higher delay and loss rate, especially as failure
percentages approach 100%. Figure 8 (c) and Figure 8 (d)
show results under targeted attacks. The performance degradation is more pronounced than under random failures, especially
in delay and loss rate. NFD-4 and SUP-6 again outperform
all other methods, maintaining the lowest delay and loss rate.
PPO-6 and SUP-4 experience rapid increases in both delay
and loss rate under higher failure percentages.
Overall, NFD-4 achieves the best performance under both
random failures and targeted attacks with the fewest parameters, demonstrating the effectiveness of NFD in training
routing models for dynamic LEO networks.
E. Inference Performance Comparison
This experiment focuses on evaluating the optimality of
each method, we compare TRACE with several mainstream
routing methods including GAT, GTN, LDS and Dijkstra in
dataset D50, where the Dijkstra is treated as the ground truth.
To ensure a fair comparison, all neural network–based methods
are configured with a 6-layer encoder and trained by SUP. In
addition, since ∆-stepping is a parallelized edition of Dijkstra,
it is not included in the comparison.
To illustrate the routing behavior of different algorithms,
Fig. 10 presents a representative case in which all methods

TABLE V
I NFERENCE P ERFORMANCE

successfully deliver the packet. TRACE infers the exact same
route as Dijkstra, demonstrating its optimality. In contrast,
GAT selects a longer route, resulting in a delay of 268 ms.
GTN and LDS infer similar routes, differing only at the
second-to-last hop: GTN selects node 45, whereas LDS selects
node 17. This difference leads to GTN achieving a lower delay
(245 ms) compared with LDS (279 ms).
Table V summarizes the inference performance under both
random failures and targeted attacks with pmax
f ail = 0.5. Under
random failures, TRACE achieves the best overall performance
among the learning-based methods, reducing delay relative
to GAT and GTN while maintaining the lowest loss rate
except for Dijkstra. LDS performs significantly worse, with
both delay and loss rate growing sharply. In contrast, under
targeted attacks, GAT shows the strongest robustness among
neural models, achieving the lowest delay (861.12 ms) and loss
rate (37.69%). TRACE ranks second, only slightly worse than
GAT and remaining close to the Dijkstra ground-truth, with
a 9.78 ms delay gap and a 1.46% loss-rate gap. GTN and
LDS degrade substantially under targeted attacks, indicating
weaker resilience. Overall, TRACE maintains strong performance across both scenarios, while GAT exhibits a distinct
advantage under targeted attacks. However, as pmax
f ail increases,
GAT exhibits pronounced instability, as shown in Figure 9. The
detailed performance of each method under different levels of
node failures will be analyzed in the following.
Under random failures, the delay curves in Figure 9 (a)
show that TRACE and Dijkstra remain nearly identical across
all failure levels, while GTN exhibits moderately higher delay,
whereas LDS degrades rapidly as failures increase. GAT
maintains low delay only when pmax
f ail is small, but becomes
unstable and deteriorates sharply once the failure ratio enters
the mid-range. The loss rate results in Figure 9 (b) reveal a
different tendency. The loss rate of GAT does not grow proportionally with pmax
f ail , indicating that large failure ratios disrupt

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:52:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10028

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

Fig. 9. Inference performance comparisons of different routing methods under random failures and targeted attacks. (a) and (b) are the delay and loss rate
comparisons of different routing methods under random failures, while (c) and (d) are the comparisons under targeted attacks.

Fig. 10. A representative routing case where all methods achieve successful delivery. (a) TRACE and Dijkstra infer the same route [0, 35, 13, 42, 21, 37, 40, 22]
with a delay of 218 ms; (b) GAT infers the route [0, 14, 20, 46, 21, 37, 40, 22] with a delay of 268 ms; (c) GTN infers the route [0, 35, 10, 12, 7, 33, 45, 22]
with a delay of 245 ms; (d) LDS infers the route [0, 35, 10, 12, 7, 33, 17, 22] with a delay of 279 ms.

its optimality: even when packets are successfully delivered, GAT increasingly selects unnecessarily longer routes.
TRACE and Dijkstra consistently achieve the lowest loss rates,
while GTN grows steadily and LDS shows the most severe
degradation.
Under targeted attacks, the delay results in Figure 9 (c)
show that GAT achieves the lowest delay when pmax
f ail is small,
but its delay rises sharply once the attack scale increases.
Importantly, this degradation is not caused by routing failures
on critical-node removal; rather, as confirmed by the lossrate curves in Figure 9 (d), GAT maintains a relatively
normal delivery ratio even under high failure levels. The
divergence between Figure 9 (c) and (d) indicates that, under
large targeted-attack magnitudes, GAT tends to select significantly longer surviving paths despite being able to deliver
packets, revealing a loss of routing optimality rather than
reliability.
This inconsistency between delay and loss-rate trends
reflects GAT’s sensitivity to structured disruptions: once key
nodes fail, its attention mechanism becomes biased toward
suboptimal long-range routes, increasing delay while keeping
loss rate relatively stable. In contrast, TRACE and Dijkstra
remain tightly aligned across all failure scales, demonstrating
strong robustness and consistent path optimality. An additional observation is that LDS performs better under targeted
attacks than under random failures. Since targeted attacks
have removed key nodes, the remaining network exhibits a
more coherent structural pattern, and hop decisions made by
LDS are strongly influenced by static graph features—benefits
from this increased structural regularity. Overall, targeted
attacks expose GAT’s instability in maintaining optimality,
while TRACE preserves both optimality and reliability across
varying failure scales.

TABLE VI
M ULTI -D OMAIN P ERFORMANCE

F. Multi-Domain Performance Evaluation
This experiment evaluates the throughput and reliability
of several mainstream routing algorithms in multi-domain
scenarios. We compare TRACE-NFD-4 against GAT-SUP-6,
GTN-SUP-6, LDS, and ∆-stepping in C20 combined with
D30, D50, and D100 under targeted attacks with pmax
f ail = 0.05,
where ∆-stepping serves as the baseline. Taking GAT-SUP-6
as an example, the first component (GAT) denotes the model,
the second component (SUP) specifies the training method,
and the final number (6) indicates the encoder depth.
Table VI reports the average throughput gain (S)
and routing relative reliability (R) of each method in
the C20–D30/D50/D100 multi-domain setting, where S
denotes the percentage of throughput improvement over the
∆-stepping baseline and R denotes the reliability ratio of
packet delivery rates relative to the baseline. Taking TRACENFD-4 (S = 100.85%) as an example, if ∆-stepping processes
50000 samples per second, then the TRACE-NFD-4 can
process (1 + S) ∗ 50000 = 100, 425 samples per second. The
results show that the proposed TRACE variants, especially
TRACE-NFD-4, consistently outperform other methods across
all domain sizes in terms of both throughput and reliability.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:52:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DAI et al.: TRACE: A GRAPH-CONSTRAINED TRANSFORMER

10029

Fig. 11. Multi-domain routing performance evaluation of different routing methods under pmax
f ail = 0.05 targeted attacks. (a) and (d) are the throughput and
reliability comparisons of different routing methods in D30+C20, (b) and (e) are the comparisons in D50+C20, while (c) and (f) are the comparisons in
D100 +C20.

In D30, all neural models achieve positive throughput
gains over ∆-stepping, while LDS remains far below the
baseline. This shows that, in small domains, the structural
complexity of routing tasks is limited and the models can
efficiently exploit local patterns, allowing efficient parallel
inference. TRACE-SUP-6 reaches a 48.56% throughput gain
with near-perfect reliability (99.95%), and TRACE-NFD-4
further improves the gain to 100.85% with similarly high reliability (99.83%). GTN-SUP-6 also performs competitively with
a 51.11% throughput improvement and 97.52% reliability.
As the domain size increases to D50, all neural models except TRACE-NFD-4 exhibit negative throughput gains,
despite maintaining high reliability. This phenomenon reflects
a scale-dependent effect: medium-sized domains introduce
more irregular and less predictable routing structures, reducing
the parallel inference effectiveness. In this case, the routing
workload becomes less aligned with the models’ strengths,
whereas ∆-stepping operates closer to its most favorable
condition, leading to a temporary throughput reversal. LDS
remains both slower and less reliable, illustrating its poor
adaptability to multi-domain routing.
When the domain size further increases to D100, throughput
recovers for several neural models. GTN-SUP-6 and TRACESUP-6 return to positive throughput gains (4.18% and 1.19%,
respectively), and TRACE-NFD-4 maintains the best (23.35%
in D50 and 41.88% in D100) while sustaining reliability above
99.6%. This phenomenon suggests that larger domains provide
richer redundancy and more consistent cross-domain routing
patterns, enabling neural networks to better exploit large-scale
structural cues.
Figure 11 (a)–(c) show the throughput trends of
different routing methods under C20 combined with
D30, D50, and D100. Consistent with the table results,

TRACE-NFD-4 maintains the highest throughput across all
three settings, while TRACE-SUP-6 and GTN-SUP-6 form a
second tier and outperform ∆-stepping. GAT-SUP-6 yields the
lowest platform throughput among neural models, as it tends
to select longer paths under dynamic conditions. For clarity,
LDS is omitted in Figure 11 (a)–(c) due to its extremely low
throughput.
The influence of domain size is also observed from the
throughput curves. In D30 +C20 (Figure 11 (a)), all neural models surpass ∆-stepping, indicating that their learned
routing policy can effectively leverage the patterns in smallscale domains. In D50 +C20 (Figure 11 (b)), all neural models
except TRACE-NFD-4 fall below the baseline. This behavior
reflects that the routing patterns in D50 align less favorably
with neural inference, whereas ∆-stepping performs closer to
its most beneficial operating condition.
In contrast, under the larger D100 +C20 topology (Figure 11 (c)), throughput partially recovers for several neural
models. This recovery suggests that large domains restore
more stable long-range routing patterns and richer structural
redundancy, which can again be effectively captured and
exploited during distributed inference. As a result, TRACENFD-4 maintains the highest throughput across all hop
distances in D100 +C20, indicating its scalability advantage
in multi-domain routing environments.
Figure 11 (d)–(f) present the corresponding reliability results averaged over 20 cross-domain configurations.
TRACE-NFD-4 achieves near-optimal mean reliability with
the smallest variance in all three settings, showing strong
robustness under heterogeneous domain structures. TRACESUP-6 and GAT-SUP-6 maintain high reliability with slightly
higher variance, while GTN-SUP-6 shows moderate reliability
and greater sensitivity to cross-domain hops. LDS exhibits

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:52:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10030

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

Fig. 12. Routing success rate versus synchronization rate under constrained inter-domain signaling. (a) D30 +C20, (b) D50 +C20, and (c) D100 +C20.

both lower reliability and the largest variance, confirming its
instability in multi-domain distributed routing.
Overall, this experiment shows that TRACE-NFD-4 is the
only method that achieves the highest throughput and nearoptimal reliability, which is due to the proposed routing
framework: intra-domain dynamics do not affect inter-domain
routing decisions, and agents can resynchronize network
topologies and recompute routes when failures occur, ensuring
that routing errors remain controlled across domains.
G. Sensitivity to Inter-Domain Synchronization Constraints
This experiment evaluates the robustness of routing
algorithms under constrained inter-domain synchronization
in multi-domain scenarios. We compare TRACE-NFD-4
against GAT-SUP-6, GTN-SUP-6, and ∆-stepping in the
C20–D30/D50/D100 multi-domain setting under random failures with pmax
f ail = 0.05. To emulate inter-domain dynamics,
we abstract the synchronization rate as the available signaling
budget for cross-domain state exchange. By limiting this rate,
we simulate scenarios with incomplete or outdated interdomain information, and evaluate routing robustness in terms
of success rate degradation.
We model inter-domain synchronization as a lightweight
summary exchange process. Each domain periodically reports
a bounded set of egress summaries, where each summary
entry contains key routing information (e.g., domain identifier,
candidate egress node, and estimated routing cost). Let S
denote the size of one summary entry. Let S denote the size
of one summary entry. If each domain exchanges K summary
entries for each destination domain every synchronization
period Ts , the synchronization volume is approximated as (29)
Vsync ≈ (M − 1)KS,

(29)

where M is the number of domains. The corresponding
synchronization rate is defined as (30)
Vsync
.
(30)
Ts
In the experiments, we vary Rsync by adjusting K and
Ts to emulate different levels of inter-domain information
availability.
Based on the above setup, we first quantify the synchronization sensitivity of different methods in Table VII. Specifically,
95
Rsync
denotes the minimum synchronization rate required to
achieve a routing success rate of 95%. A lower value indicates
Rsync =

TABLE VII
S YNCHRONIZATION T HRESHOLD FOR S TABLE ROUTING

that the method can maintain stable routing performance with
more limited inter-domain information.
As shown in Table VII, ∆-stepping achieves the lowest synchronization requirement, with thresholds of 0.84, 0.88, and
0.82 in D30 +C20, D50 +C20, and D100 +C20, respectively.
TRACE-SUP and TRACE-NFD achieve comparable thresholds, where TRACE-SUP requires 0.88, 0.83, and 0.87, while
TRACE-NFD requires 0.92, 0.93, and 0.87. This indicates that
TRACE can maintain routing reliability close to deterministic
shortest-path search under constrained inter-domain synchronization. In contrast, GTN consistently requires a much higher
synchronization rate of 1.40 across all three settings, and GAT
shows larger variation from 0.93 to 1.03, indicating stronger
sensitivity to incomplete inter-domain information.
Figure 12 (a)–(c) further illustrates the success-rate trends
under different synchronization rates. As the synchronization
rate increases, all methods generally achieve higher routing
success rates because fresher and more complete inter-domain
state information becomes available.
In the low-synchronization regime, where inter-domain
information is severely limited, TRACE exhibits competitive
or even slightly better performance compared to ∆-stepping in
some cases, as shown in Figure 12 (a) and Figure 12 (b). This
is because ∆-stepping relies more directly on accurate and
up-to-date link-state information, while TRACE can leverage
learned routing patterns to make more robust decisions under
partial state visibility.
As the synchronization rate increases, ∆-stepping quickly
approaches near-perfect routing success rates, reflecting its
advantage in deterministic shortest-path computation when
sufficient topology information is available. In contrast,
learning-based methods, including TRACE, gradually converge to similar performance levels, demonstrating their ability
to approximate optimal routing decisions given adequate interdomain information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:52:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DAI et al.: TRACE: A GRAPH-CONSTRAINED TRANSFORMER

In larger-scale scenarios such as D100, as shown in Figure 12 (c), ∆-stepping achieves consistently higher success
rates in the high-synchronization regime, due to its exact
utilization of explicit link weights in a more complex topology.
Meanwhile, TRACE maintains stable performance across different synchronization levels, without significant degradation
under reduced synchronization, which is consistent with the
relatively stable thresholds observed in Table VII.
Overall, these results indicate that while deterministic
methods achieve optimal performance when full information
is available, the proposed TRACE framework provides a
more robust and scalable alternative under constrained interdomain synchronization, achieving competitive performance
with reduced sensitivity to incomplete topology information.
V. C ONCLUSION
This work presented TRACE, a topology-aware Transformer
architecture with adjacency-constrained encoding, together
with NFD, a navigator–follower self-distillation mechanism
designed for resilient and efficient routing in large LEO
constellations. By coupling structure-aware attention with
Monte Carlo–driven policy refinement, the proposed approach
enables agents to learn stable routing behaviors under both
random failures and targeted attacks. We further developed
a hierarchical distributed routing architecture that extends
these capabilities to multi-domain settings while maintaining
controllable inter-domain errors.
Extensive simulations demonstrate that TRACE with NFD
achieves near-optimal routing accuracy, significantly improves
throughput, and offers strong robustness compared with mainstream routing algorithms. The results underscore the benefits
of integrating topology-constrained neural architectures with
distributed execution for scalable LEO routing, advancing the
broader goal of efficient communication in future SAGINs,
while supporting emerging security-aware applications such
as radio frequency fingerprinting, device authentication, and
anomaly detection.
R EFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]

[8]

E. Lagunas, S. Chatzinotas, and B. Ottersten, “Low-earth orbit satellite
constellations for global communication network connectivity,” Nature
Rev. Electr. Eng., vol. 1, no. 10, pp. 656–665, Sep. 2024.
Y. Li et al., “Stable hierarchical routing for operational LEO networks,”
in Proc. 30th Annu. Int. Conf. Mobile Comput. Netw., May 2024,
pp. 296–311.
J. Zhang, B. Zhang, X. Cao, J. Wang, H. Dai, and S. Li, “Space
information networks: Architecture, technologies, and research issues,”
IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 98–105, Feb. 2016.
G. Giambene, S. Kota, and P. Pillai, “NGSO satellite constellations:
Communication and networking,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 58, no. 4,
pp. 21–27, Apr. 2020.
O. Kodheli et al., “Satellite communications in the new space era: A
survey and future challenges,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 23,
no. 1, pp. 70–109, 1st Quart., 2021.
R. Radhakrishnan et al., “Survey of inter-satellite communication for
small satellite systems: Physical layer to network layer view,” IEEE
Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 2442–2473, 4th Quart., 2016.
Y. Ran, Y. Ding, S. Chen, J. Lei, and J. Luo, “Fully-distributed dynamic
packet routing for LEO satellite networks: A GNN-enhanced multi-agent
reinforcement learning approach,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 74,
no. 3, pp. 5229–5234, Mar. 2025.
O. Kodheli et al., “Satellite communications in the new space era: A
survey and future challenges,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 23,
no. 1, pp. 70–109, Jan. 2021.

10031

[9]

X. Shi et al., “Graph processing on gpus: A survey,” ACM Comput.
Surv., vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1–35, Jan. 2018.
[10] C. Han, W. Xiong, and R. Yu, “Load-balancing routing for LEO satellite
network with distributed hops-based back-pressure strategy,” Sensors,
vol. 23, no. 24, p. 9789, Dec. 2023.
[11] H. Dui, J. Zhai, and X. Fu, “Attack strategies and reliability analysis of
wireless mesh networks considering cascading failures,” Rel. Eng. Syst.
Saf., vol. 257, May 2025, Art. no. 110832.
[12] Z. Lai et al., “LeoCC: Making internet congestion control robust to
LEO satellite dynamics,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conf., Sep. 2025,
pp. 129–146.
[13] Z. Du, J. Jiao, H. Liu, Y. Wang, and Q. Zhang, “Multi-attribute consistency segment resilient routing for LEO satellite mega constellations,”
IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 24, no. 10, pp. 10823–10839, Oct.
2025.
[14] W. Wu and X. Huang, “Split-LEO: Efficient AI model training over
LEO satellite networks,” Sci. China Inf. Sci., vol. 68, no. 9, Sep. 2025,
Art. no. 190305.
[15] X. Zhou et al., “Distributed routing and data scheduling in IPNs with
GNN-based multiagent DRL,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 12,
pp. 21565–21576, Jun. 2025.
[16] Z. Zhao, G. Verma, C. Rao, A. Swami, and S. Segarra, “Distributed
scheduling using graph neural networks,” 2020, arXiv:2011.09430.
[17] C. Wang et al., “Bi-level multiobjective evolutionary learning: A case
study on multitask graph neural topology search,” IEEE Trans. Evol.
Comput., vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 208–222, Feb. 2024.
[18] F. Lozano-Cuadra, B. Soret, I. Leyva-Mayorga, and P. Popovski,
“Continual deep reinforcement learning for decentralized satellite
routing,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 73, no. 10, pp. 8996–9012, Oct.
2025.
[19] S. Mahboob and L. Liu, “Revolutionizing future connectivity: A contemporary survey on AI-empowered satellite-based non-terrestrial networks
in 6G,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 1279–1321,
2nd Quart., 2024.
[20] R. Zhang et al., “Generative AI agents with large language model for
satellite networks via a mixture of experts transmission,” IEEE J. Sel.
Areas Commun., vol. 42, no. 12, pp. 3581–3596, Dec. 2024.
[21] R. Zhang et al., “Generative AI for space-air-ground integrated
networks,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 10–20, Dec.
2024.
[22] J. Huang, Y. Yang, J. Lee, D. He, and Y. Li, “Deep reinforcement
learning-based resource allocation for RSMA in LEO satellite-terrestrial
networks,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 72, no. 3, pp. 1341–1354, Mar.
2024.
[23] C. Lei et al., “Joint partitioning, allocation, and transmission
optimization for federated learning in satellite constellations via
multi-task MARL,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 24, no. 10,
pp. 10345–10362, Oct. 2025.
[24] V. That, S. Muy, and J.-R. Lee, “Federated learning-based spectrum
and energy efficiency enhancement in HAP-assisted LEO satellite
communication,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 296, Jan. 2026, Art. no.
128916.
[25] M. Elmahallawy, T. Luo, and K. Ramadan, “Communication-efficient
federated learning for LEO constellations integrated with HAPs using
hybrid NOMA-OFDM,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 42, no. 5,
pp. 1097–1114, May 2024.
[26] Z. Zhai, Q. Wu, S. Yu, R. Li, F. Zhang, and X. Chen, “FedLEO: An
offloading-assisted decentralized federated learning framework for low
Earth orbit satellite networks,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 23,
no. 5, pp. 5260–5279, May 2024.
[27] Z. Lin, Z. Chen, Z. Fang, X. Chen, X. Wang, and Y. Gao, “FedSN: A federated learning framework over heterogeneous LEO satellite networks,”
IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1293–1307, Mar. 2025.
[28] D.-J. Han, S. Hosseinalipour, D. J. Love, M. Chiang, and C. G. Brinton,
“Cooperative federated learning over ground-to-satellite integrated networks: Joint local computation and data offloading,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun., vol. 42, no. 5, pp. 1080–1096, May 2024.
[29] Uditi and M. Arun, “Comparative analysis of parallelised shortest path
algorithms using open MP,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Sens., Signal Process.
Secur. (ICSSS), May 2017, pp. 369–378.
[30] N. Jasika, N. Alispahic, A. Elma, K. Ilvana, L. Elma, and N. Nosovic, “Dijkstra’s shortest path algorithm serial and parallel execution
performance analysis,” in Proc. 35th Int. Conv. MIPRO, May 2012,
pp. 1811–1815.
[31] G. Redinbo, “Queueing systems, volume I: Theory–leonard kleinrock,”
IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. C-25, no. 1, pp. 178–179, Jan. 1977.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:52:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10032

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

[32] D. Bertsekas and R. Gallager, Data Networks. Upper Saddle River, NJ,
USA: Prentice-Hall, 1992.
[33] X. Wang, Y. Chen, and O. A. Dobre, “Designing robust 6G networks
with bimodal distribution for decentralized federated learning,” in Proc.
IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), May
2024, pp. 1–6.
[34] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
convolutional networks,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2017.
[Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=SJU4ayYgl
[35] P. Velickovic, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and
Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. 6th Int. Conf.
Learn. Represent., 2018. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/
forum?id=rJXMpikCZ
[36] S. Yun, M. Jeong, R. Kim, J. Kang, and H. J. Kim, Graph Transformer
Networks. Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran Associates Inc., 2019.
[37] K. Lei, P. Guo, Y. Wang, X. Wu, and W. Zhao, “Solve routing problems
with a residual edge-graph attention neural network,” Neurocomputing,
vol. 508, pp. 79–98, Oct. 2022.
[38] A. M. Nagib, H. Abou-zeid, and H. S. Hassanein, “Toward safe and
accelerated deep reinforcement learning for next-generation wireless
networks,” IEEE Netw., vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 182–189, Mar. 2023, doi:
10.1109/MNET.106.2100578.
[39] Z. Xiong, Y. Zhang, D. Niyato, R. Deng, P. Wang, and L.-C. Wang,
“Deep reinforcement learning for mobile 5G and beyond: Fundamentals,
applications, and challenges,” IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag., vol. 14, no. 2,
pp. 44–52, Jun. 2019.
[40] X. Cao et al., “Exploring LLM-based multi-agent situation awareness
for zero-trust space-air-ground integrated network,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun., vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 2230–2247, Jun. 2025.
[41] C. Westphal, L. Han, and R. Li, “LEO satellite networking relaunched:
Survey and current research challenges,” 2023, arXiv:2310.07646.
[42] S. Kaur, “Analysis of inter-satellite free-space optical link performance
considering different system parameters,” Opto-Electronics Rev., vol. 27,
no. 1, pp. 10–13, Mar. 2019.
[43] U. Meyer and P. Sanders, “Delta-stepping: A parallelizable shortest path
algorithm,” J. Algorithms, vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 114–152, Oct. 2003.
[44] P. Prosser and C. Unsworth, “Limited discrepancy search revisited,”
ACM J. Experim. Algorithmics, vol. 16, Aug. 2011, Art. no. 1.6.
[45] P. Velickovic, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and
Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” 2018, arxiv:1710.10903.
[46] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov,
“Proximal policy optimization algorithms,” 2017, arXiv:1707.06347.

Zhongyuan Jiang received the B.S. and Ph.D.
degrees from Beijing Jiaotong University in 2009
and 2013, respectively. He is currently a Professor with the School of Cyber Engineering, Xidian
University, China. His research interests include
network function virtualization, mega-constellations,
and next-generation wireless networks.

Qiuchao Dai received the M.E. degree in computer
technology from Xi’an Shiyou University, China, in
2024. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with
the School of Cyber Engineering, Xidian University,
Xi’an, China, focusing on distributed intelligent optimization and multi-agent collaborative techniques
for next-generation LEO satellite networks.

Jianfeng Ma (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree from Shaanxi Normal University in 1985 and
the Ph.D. degree from Xidian University, China, in
1995. He is currently a Professor with the School
of Cyber Engineering, Xidian University, and the
Director of the Key Laboratory of Network and
System Security of Shaanxi Province. His research
interests include cryptography, wireless network
security, data security, and mobile intelligent system
security.

Fanxuan Sun received the B.E. degree in
cyberspace security from Xidian University, Xi’an,
China, in 2023, where he is currently pursuing the
M.S. degree with the School of Cyber Engineering,
focusing on distributed computing frameworks and
LEO constellation communication.

Xinghua Li (Member, IEEE) received the M.S.
and Ph.D. degrees in computer science from Xidian
University, China, in 2004 and 2007, respectively.
He is currently a Professor with the School of
Cyber Engineering, Xidian University. His research
interests include wireless network security, privacy
protection, cloud computing, and security protocol
formal methodology.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 19:52:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

